The Works of E. P. Roe

Volume Sixteen

A YOUNG GIRL'S WOOING

Illustrated

1884

CONTENTS

  CHAPTER I
  A Crescent of a Girl

  CHAPTER II
  Graydon Muir

  CHAPTER III
  The Parting

  CHAPTER IV
  Effort

  CHAPTER V
  Achievement

  CHAPTER VI
  The Secret of Beauty

  CHAPTER VII
  Not a Miracle

  CHAPTER VIII
  Rival Girls

  CHAPTER IX
  The Meeting

  CHAPTER X
  Old Ties Broken

  CHAPTER XI
  "I Fear I Shall Fail"

  CHAPTER XII
  The Promptings of Miss Wildmere's Heart

  CHAPTER XIII
  "You Will Be Disappointed"

  CHAPTER XIV
  Miss Wildmere's Strategy

  CHAPTER XV
  Perplexed and Beguiled

  CHAPTER XVI
  Declaration of Independence

  CHAPTER XVII
  Not Strong in Vain

  CHAPTER XVIII
  Make Your Terms

  CHAPTER XIX
  An Object for Sympathy

  CHAPTER XX
  "Veiled Wooing"

  CHAPTER XXI
  Suggestive Tones

  CHAPTER XXII
  Disheartening Confidences

  CHAPTER XXIII
  The Filial Martyr

  CHAPTER XXIV
  "I'll See How You Behave"

  CHAPTER XXV
  Gossamer Threads

  CHAPTER XXVI
  Mrs. Muir's Account

  CHAPTER XXVII
  Madge's Story

  CHAPTER XXVIII
  Dispassionate Lovers

  CHAPTER XXIX
  The Enemies' Plans

  CHAPTER XXX
  The Strong Man Unmanned

  CHAPTER XXXI
  Checkmate

  CHAPTER XXXII
  Madge is Matter-of-Fact

  CHAPTER XXXIII
  The End of Diplomacy

  CHAPTER XXXIV
  Broken Lights and Shadows

  CHAPTER XXXV
  A New Experiment

  CHAPTER XXXVI
  Madge Alden's Ride

  CHAPTER XXXVII
  "You are Very Blind"

  CHAPTER XXXVIII
  "Certainly I Refuse You"

  CHAPTER XXXIX
  "My True Friend"

  CHAPTER XL
  The End of the Wooing

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  "Are you so bent upon winning her, Graydon?"

  "There, now, be rational" cried the young girl

  Her lips were parted, her pose, grace itself

  "Promise me you will take a long rest"

  "So you imagine I shall soon be making love to another girl?"

CHAPTER I

A CRESCENT OF A GIRL

When Madge Alden was seventeen years of age an event occurred which promised to be the misfortune
of her life. At first she was almost overwhelmed and knew not what to do. She was but a young
and inexperienced girl, and for a year or more had been regarded as an invalid.

Madge Alden was an orphan. Four years prior to the opening of our story she had lost her mother,
her surviving parent, and since had resided with her elder sister Mary, who was several years
her senior, and had married Henry Muir, a merchant of New York City. This gentleman had cordially
united with his wife in offering Madge a home, and his manner toward the young girl, as far
as his absorbed and busy life permitted, had been almost paternal. He was a quiet, reticent
man, who had apparently concentrated every faculty of soul and body on the problem of commercial
success. Trained to business from boyhood, he had allowed it to become his life, and he took
it very seriously. It was to him an absorbing game--his vocation, and not a means to some ulterior
end. He had already accumulated enough to maintain his family in affluence, but he no more
thought of retiring from trade than would a veteran whist-player wish to throw up a handful
of winning cards. The events of the world, the fluctuations in prices, over which he had no
control, brought to his endeavor the elements of chance, and it was his mission to pit against
these uncertainties untiring industry and such skill and foresight as he possessed.

His domestic life was favorable to his ruling passion. Mary Alden, at the time of her marriage,
was a quiet girl, whose early life had been shadowed by sorrow. She had seen her father pass
away in his prime, and her mother become in consequence a sad and failing woman. The young
girl rallied from these early years of depression into cheerfulness, and thoroughly enjoyed
what some might regard as a monotonous life; but she never developed any taste for the diversions
of society. Thus it may be surmised that Mr. Muir encountered no distractions after business
hours. He ever found a good dinner awaiting him, and his wife held herself in readiness to
do what he wished during the evening, so far as the claims of the children permitted. Therefore
there were few more contented men in the city than he, and the name of Henry Muir had become
a synonym among his acquaintances for methodical business habits.

In character and antecedents his younger brother, Graydon Muir, who was also an inmate of his
family, presented many marked contrasts to the elder man. He had received a liberal education,
and had graduated at a city college. He had developed into one of the best products of metropolitan
life, and his defects were chiefly due to the circumstances of his lot. During his academic
course he had been known as an athletic rather than a bookish man, and had left his Alma Mater
with an Apollo-like physique. At the same time he had developed fine literary tastes, and was
well informed, even if he had not gone very deeply into the classics and the sciences that
were remote from the business career which he had chosen. After a brief interval of foreign
travel he had entered his brother's office, and was schooling his buoyant, pleasure-loving
temperament to the routine of trade. When business hours were over, however, Graydon gave himself
up to the gratification of his social tastes. His vitality and flow of spirits were so immense
that wherever he went he always caused a breezy ripple of excitement. Even veteran society
girls found something exhilarating in the mirthful flash of his blue eyes, and to be whirled
through a waltz on his strong arm was a pleasure not declined by reigning belles. Many looks
that to other men might have been the arrows of Cupid were directed toward him, but they glanced
harmlessly from his polished armor. Society was to him what business was to his brother,--an
arena in which he easily manifested his power. At the same time he was a manly fellow, and
had no taste for corner flirtations or the excitement of drawing perilously near to a committal
with those who would have responded to marked attentions. The atmosphere he loved was that
of general and social gayety. The girls that he singled out for his especial regard were noted
for their vivacity and intelligence, as well as their beauty. Meanwhile he had won a reputation
for his good-natured attentions to "wall-flowers." Such kindly efforts were rarely made at
the promptings of conscience. The truth was, he enjoyed life so fully himself that he disliked
to see any one having a dismal time. It gave him genuine pleasure to come to a plain-featured,
neglected damsel, and set all her blood tingling by a brief whirl in a dance or a breezy chat
that did her good, body and soul, so devoid of satire or patronage was the attention. His superb
health and tireless strength, his perfect familiarity with the usages of society, and his graceful
decision of action made everything he did appear as easy and natural as the beat of a bird's
wing upon the air, and in his large circle it was felt that no entertainment was complete without
his presence.

Graydon was still attending college when Madge Alden first became associated with him in her
home-life. She was then but thirteen, and was small and slight for her age. The first evening
when she came down to dinner, shrinking in the shadow of her sister, lingered ever in her memory.
Even now it gave her pain to recall her embarrassment when she was compelled to take her seat
in the full blaze of the light and meet the eyes of the one to whom she felt that she must
appear so very plain and unattractive. Clad in the deepest mourning, pallid from grief and
watching at her mother's bedside, coming from a life of seclusion and sorrow, sensitive in
the extreme, she had barely reached that age when awkwardness is in the ascendant, and the
quiet city home seemed the centre of a new and strange world. One other thing she remembered
in that initial chapter of her life,--the kindly glances that Graydon Muir bent on the pale
crescent of a girl who sat opposite to him. Even as a child she knew that the handsome young
fellow was not secretly laughing at or criticising her, and before dinner was over she had
ventured upon a shy, grateful glance, in reward for his good-humored efforts to break the ice.

There had, in truth, been no ice to break. The child was merely like a plant that had grown
in the shade, and to her the strong, healthful youth was sunshine. His smile warmed and vivified
her chilled nature, his hearty words and manner were bracing to her over-sensitive and timid
soul, and his unaffected, unforced kindness was so constant that she gradually came to regard
it as one of the best certainties of her life. She soon learned, however, that behind his sunny
good-nature was a fiery and impatient spirit, ready to manifest itself if he was chafed beyond
a certain point, and so a slight element of fear was mingled with her childlike affection.

He had sufficient tact to understand Madge's diffidence, and he knew that their family life
would soon banish it. He welcomed this pale slip of a girl to their home circle because it
gave him pleasure to pet and rally such a wraith into something like genuine existence. He
also hoped that eventually she would become a source of amusement to him. Nor was he disappointed.
Madge's mind was not colorless, if her face was, and she gradually began to respond to his
mirthfulness, and to take an interest, intelligent for a child, in what occupied his thoughts.
Kindness creates an atmosphere in which the most sensitive and diffident natures develop and
reveal themselves, and Madge Alden, who might easily have been chilled into a reticent and
dispirited girl, eventually manifested an unusual versatility of fancy and thought, acquiring
also no slight power of expression.

Thus Graydon obtained his reward. His brother was a grave and silent man, to whom few themes
could be broached except those of business and the events and politics of the day in their
relation to trade. His sister-in-law was absorbed in household and family cares, but Madge's
great black eyes responded with quick appreciation to all that he said, and their merry nonsense
often provoked a smile upon even the face of Mr. Muir. The good-natured sympathy of the young
man therefore passed gradually into a genuine fraternal regard, and he rarely came home of
an evening without bringing flowers, bonbons, or some other evidence that he had remembered
her. Unconsciously to herself, he became more to her than her sister, who was indulgent in
the extreme, but not very demonstrative. Her shyness disappeared, and his caresses seemed as
natural as those of an elder brother, in which light she regarded him.

Thus time passed on, and the girl rapidly approached the stature of womanhood. Apparently she
grew too fast for her slight reserve of physical strength. She nominally attended a fashionable
school, but was often absent from ill health, and for this reason her sister permitted her
to follow her own moods. Indolence and inanition accounted largely for her lack of strength.
Exercise brought weariness, and she would not take it. Nothing pleased her more than to curl
up on a lounge with a book; and her sister, seeing that she was reading most of the time, felt
that she was getting an education. To the busy lady a book was a book, a kind of general fertilizer
of the mind, and as Madge usually took cold when she went out, and was assuredly acquiring
from the multitude of volumes she devoured all the knowledge a woman needed, she was safer
in the evenly heated city house. The sisters had independent fortunes of their own, and the
great point in Mrs. Muir's mind was that they should live and enjoy them. If Madge was only
sufficiently coddled now while she was growing, she would get strong eventually; and so the
good lady, who had as much knowledge of hygiene as of Sanscrit, tempted the invalid with delicacies,
permitted her to eat the confectionery that Graydon brought so often, and generally indulged
a nature that needed wise and firm development.

Thus Madge lived on, growing more pale and languid with each succeeding year. The absence in
the mountains and at the seashore which Mr. Muir permitted to his family every summer brought
changes for the better, even though the young girl spent most of the time in a hammock or reclining
in the stern of a sail-boat. She could not escape the invigoration caused by the mere breathing
of pure air, but during the winters in town she lost all and more than she had gained, and
sunk back into her old apathetic life.

This life, however, contained two elements which gave some color and zest to her existence.
All through the day she would look forward to Graydon's return from business, and when she
heard his latch-key the faintest possible color would steal into her cheeks. Up-stairs, two
steps at a time, he would come, kiss her, waltz her about the room with a strength which scarcely
permitted her feet to touch the floor, then toss her back on the lounge, where she would lie,
laughing, breathless, and happy. With a man's ignorant tolerance he accepted her character
as an invalid, and felt that the least he could do was to brighten a life which seemed so dismal
to him. When he came down dressed for dinner or some evening engagement, she looked at him
with a frank, admiring pride that amused him immensely. When he returned earlier than usual
he often found her still upon the lounge with her inevitable book, usually a novel, and then
he would take her upon his lap and call her his "dear little spook, the household ghost that
would soon cease to cast a shadow;" and she, with a languid curiosity, would easily beguile
from him a portrayal of the scenes through which he had just passed. She cared little for them,
but from his stores of vitality and strength he imparted life to her, and without understanding
why, she simply knew she was happy.

Apart from her fondness for the unreal scenes presented by the miscellaneous books she read--scenes
all the more unreal because she had no experience by which to correct them--she had one other
taste which promised well for the future--a sincere love of music. She was taking lessons,
but it was from a superficial teacher, who was content to give her pretty and showy pieces;
and she brought even to this favorite study the desultory habits which characterized all her
efforts to obtain an education. When she sat down to her piano, however, nature was her strong
ally. Her ear was fine and correct, and her sensitive, fanciful spirit gave delicacy and originality
to her touch. It scarcely seems possible for one to become a sympathetic musician without a
large degree of imagination and a nature easily moved by thought and feeling. The young girl's
thoughts and feelings were as yet very vague, not concentrated on definite objects, and yet
so good a connoisseur as Graydon often acknowledged her power, and would listen with pleased
attention to her girlish rendering of music made familiar to him by the great performers of
the day. He enjoyed it all the more because it was her own interpretation, often incorrect,
but never commonplace or slovenly; and when her fingers wandered among the keys in obedience
to her own impulses he was even more charmed, although the melody was usually without much
meaning. She was also endowed with the rudiments of a fine voice, and would often strike notes
of surpassing sweetness and power; but her tones would soon quaver and break, and she complained
that it tired her to sing. That ended the matter, for anything that wearied her was not to
be thought of.

Thus she had drifted on with time, unconscious of herself, unconscious of the influences that
would bring to pass the decisive events in the future. She was like multitudes of others who
are controlled by circumstances of their lot until the time comes when a deep personal experience
applies the touchstone to character.

CHAPTER II

GRAYDON MUIR

Madge Alden was almost seventeen, and yet she was in many respects a child. Scenes portrayed
in books had passed before her mind like pictures, having no definite significance. Mr. Muir
was to her like some of the forces in nature--quiet, unobtrusive, omnipotent--and she accepted
him without thought. Her sister was one whom she could love easily as a matter of course. She
was an indulgent household providence, who cared for the young girl as she did for her own
little children. If anything was amiss in Madge's wardrobe the elder sister made it right at
once; if Madge had a real or imaginary ailment, Mary was always ready to prescribe a soothing
remedy; and if there was a cloud in the sky or the wind blew chill she said, "Madge, do be
prudent; you know how easily you take cold." Thus was provided the hot-house atmosphere in
which the tender exotic existed. It could not be said that she had thrived or bloomed.

Graydon Muir was the one positive element with which she had come in contact, and thus far
she had always accepted him in the spirit of a child. He had begun petting her and treating
her like a sister when she was a child. His manner toward her had grown into a habit, which
had its source in his kindly disposition. To him she was but a weak, sickly little girl, with
a dismal present and a more dreary outlook. Sometimes he mentally compared her with the brilliant
girls he met in society, and especially with one but a little older than Madge, who appeared
a natural queen in the drawing-room. His life abounded in activity, interests, and pleasures,
and if it was his impulse to throw a little zest into the experiences of those in society who
had no claims upon him, he was still more disposed to cheer and amuse the invalid in his own
home. Moreover, he had become sincerely fond of her. Madge was neither querulous nor stupid.
Although not conceited, he had the natural vanity of a handsome and successful man, and while
the evident fact that he was such a hero in her eyes amused him, it also predisposed him to
kindly and sympathetic feeling toward her. He saw that she gave him not only a sisterly allegiance,
but also a richer and fuller tribute, and that in her meagre and shadowed life he was the brightest
element. She tried to do more for him than for any one else, while she made him feel that as
an invalid she could not do very much, and that he should not expect it. She would often play
for him an hour at a time, and again she would be so languid that no coaxing could lure her
from the sofa. Occasionally she would even read aloud a few pages with her musical and sympathetic
voice, but would soon throw down the book with an air of exhaustion, and plead that he would
read to her. In her weakness there was nothing repulsive, and without calculation she made
many artless appeals to his strength. He generously responded, saying to himself, "Poor little
thing! she has a hard time of it. With her great black eyes she might be a beauty if she only
had health and was like other girls; but as it is, she is so light and pale and limp that I
sometimes feel as if I were petting a wraith."

Of late she had begun to go out with him a little, he choosing small and quiet companies among
people well known to the Muirs, and occasionally her sister also went. Her rôle of invalid
was carefully maintained and recognized. Graydon had always prided himself on his loyalty as
an escort; and as long as he was devoted, the neglect of other young men was welcomed rather
than regretted; for, except toward him, all her old shyness still existed. With the consciousness
that he was caring for her she was well content with some half-secluded nook of observation,
from which she looked out upon scenes that were like an animated story. She wove fanciful imaginings
around those who attracted her attention, and on her return laughingly discussed the people
who had passed, like players, before her eyes. Graydon encouraged her to do this, for her ignorance
of society made her remarks original and amusing. He knew the conventional status of every
one they met as accurately as his brother recognized the commercial value of the securities
that passed under his eye, and Madge's estimates often seemed absurd to the last degree.

Whenever she went out with Graydon his course was eminently satisfactory; she never felt herself
neglected, while at the same time she saw that his attentions were welcomed everywhere. She
never lost her serene sense of proprietorship, and only grew more fond of him as she noted
how readily he left the side of beautiful and gifted women to look after her. He had often
laughingly asserted that he went into society only for amusement, and his course under her
own observation confirmed his words.

Early in the winter during which our story opens, she had caught a succession of colds, and
one proved so severe and obstinate that her friends were alarmed, fearing that she was going
into a decline. She slowly rallied, however, but was more frail than ever. Before the gay season
closed, just preceding Lent, Madge received an invitation to a very large party. Graydon urged
her to go, remarking that she had not yet seen society. "Don't be afraid, I'll take care of
you, little ghost," he said, and with this assurance she accompanied him, contrary to her sister's
advice. It was indeed a brilliant occasion. The wide rooms of a Madison Avenue palace were
thronged, and she had never even imagined such toilets as caught her eye on every side. There
were so many present that she could easily maintain her position of quiet spectator, and her
eyes dilated with pleasure as she saw that Graydon was as much a leader as at other places
where comparatively few were present.

At last her attention was attracted by one who was evidently a late comer, and whose presence
appeared to fill the apartment. All the others paled before her, as do the stars when the moon
rises among them. She was evidently young, and yet she did not suggest youth. One would almost
imagine that she had never had a childhood or a girlhood, but was rather a direct creation
of metropolitan society. Her exquisitely turned shoulders and arms were bare, and the diamonds
about her neck were a circlet of fire. The complexion of her fair oval face was singularly
pure, and the color came and went so easily as to prove that it owed nothing to art. The expression
of her gray eyes was rather cold and haughty when at rest, and gave an impression of pride
and the consciousness of power. The trait which to the observant Madge seemed most marked at
first, however, was her perfect ease. Her slightest movement was grace itself. Her entire self-possession
was indicated by the manner in which she greeted the men who sought her attention, and many
there were. She could be perfectly polite, yet as repellent as ice, or she could smile with
a fascination that even Madge felt would be hard to resist. This girl, who was such an immense
contrast to herself, wholly fixed her attention as she stood for a few moments, like a queen,
surrounded by her courtiers.

Graydon had gone for a glass of water, and meeting a friend had been detained for a brief space.
Madge saw him coming, saw his eye light up with admiration as he caught sight of the beautiful
stranger, but he came directly to her, and asked, genially, if there was anything else she
would like.

"Yes. Who is that girl yonder?"

"Miss Wildmere. Isn't she lovely? She promised me, last week, her first dance for this evening.
Will you excuse me for a little while?"

"Certainly;" and yet she was conscious of a sudden and odd little protest at heart.

He approached the beauty. Miss Wildmere's face flushed with pleasure and softened into a welcoming
smile, such as she had not yet bestowed upon any who had sought her favor. Then, in swift alternation,
she bent upon Madge a brief, cold glance of scrutiny. So brief was it, and so complacent was
the expression of the belle as she turned away, that the pallid, sensitive girl was told, as
by words, "You are nothing."

That glance was like a sharp, deep wound, and pierced where she was most vulnerable. It said
to her, "You are not capable of being anything to Graydon Muir. I am not in the least afraid
of you."

What was she to him? What did she wish to be? To these questions Madge had but one answer.
Any and every girl, in her belief, would be only too glad to win him. He had said that Miss
Wildmere was lovely; his eyes had expressed an admiration which he had never bestowed upon
her; he had led the beauty away with a glad content in his face, and the crowded room was made
empty by their absence.

She was no longer conscious of weakness, but, obeying her impulse, sprang up and followed them
to the ballroom. Concealed by a little group she stood, unwearied, and watched them as they
glided hither and thither with a grace that attracted many eyes. The music appeared to control
and animate them, and their motion was harmony itself. Graydon evidently thought only of his
fair partner; but her swift glances were everywhere, gathering the rich revenue of admiration
which was freely offered. For a second she encountered Madge's large black eyes, full of trouble,
and a satirical smile proved that she enjoyed the poor girl's solicitude. To deepen it she
looked up at Graydon and said something that caused his face to flush with pleasure. His response
was more decisive, for the swift color came into her face, and her eyes drooped. The by-play
was momentary, and would not have been seen by a less vigilant observer than Madge; but to
her it gave the undoubted impression that they were lovers. When Miss Wildmere looked again
to see the result of her unkindly strategy, Madge was gone.

In reaction she had grown almost faint, and reached her former retreat with difficulty. But
all her latent womanhood speedily rallied to meet this strange and but half-comprehended emergency.
The impulse now uppermost was to retain her self-control and reach the seclusion of her own
room. How she was to endure the long hours she scarcely knew. She did not dare to think. Indeed,
the effort was scarcely possible, for her mind was at first in tumult, with only one thing
clear, a poignant sense of loss and trouble.

Graydon was a long time away, longer than he had ever been before when acting as her escort.
While she felt this neglect, and interpreted it naturally, she was not sorry. She dreaded meeting
him again. In one brief hour her old ease and freedom with him had gone. She wondered at the
change in herself, yet knew that it was as definite and decided as if she had become another
person. When be had brought her the glass of water she could look into his face with the frank
directness of a child. Why could she not do so now? Why did she almost tremble at the thought
of his glance, his touch, his presence? She knew that he would come back with his old genial,
kindly manner--that he would be the same. But a change had occurred in her which made the fabled
transmutations of magic wands seem superficial indeed. Would he note this change? Could he
guess the cause? Oh, what was the cause? Even her pale face grew crimson, for there are truths
that come to the consciousness like the lightning from heaven. She did not need to think, to
weigh and reason. A woman's heart is often above and beyond her reason, and hers had been awakened
at last by the all-powerful touch of love.

The time passed, and still Graydon did not come. He was not absent very long, and yet it began
to seem terribly long to her. She had overrated her powers, and found that even pride could
not sustain her. She had no reserve of strength to draw upon. The heat of the room grew oppressive,
and she was unaccustomed to throngs, confusion, and noise. The consciousness of her weakness
was forced upon her most painfully at last by the appearance of Miss Wildmere on Graydon's
arm. The belle was smiling, radiant, her step elastic, her eyes shining with excitement and
pleasure. Her practiced scrutiny had assured her that she was the queen of the hour; the handsomest
and most courtly man present was so devoted as to suggest that he might easily become a lover;
she had seen many glances of envy, and one, in the case of poor Madge, of positive pain. What
more could her heart desire? Graydon conducted her to her chaperon, near whom half a dozen
gentlemen were waiting for a chance to be his successor; and, having obtained her promise for
another dance later in the evening, he turned deprecatingly to Madge. His apologies ceased
before they were half spoken. She looked so white and ill that he was alarmed, and asked permission
to get her a glass of wine.

"No, Graydon," she said, then hesitated, for she felt the color coming into her face, while
a strange blur confused every object in the room. "I'm very, very sorry," she added, hastily,
after a moment. "I ought not to have come. I'm not equal to this. It wouldn't take you very
long to drive home with me, and then you could return. Please, Graydon."

Her tone was so urgent, and she appeared so weak, that he complied at once, saying, with much
compunction, "I should not have left you alone so long, but supposed you were amusing yourself
by looking at the people."

She did not trust herself to reply. Her one thought was to reach the refuge of her own apartment,
and to this end she concentrated her failing energies. The climb to the ladies' dressing-room
was a desperate effort; but when she was once outside the house the cold, pure air revived
her slightly.

"You can excuse me to our hostess--she will not care," she faltered, and it seemed to her then
that nobody would care. Miss Wildmere's glance had conveyed the estimate of society. If she
could believe herself first in Graydon's thoughts she would not be cast down, but now the truth
was overwhelming.

She leaned away from him in the corner of the carriage, but he put his strong arm round her
and drew her to his breast. She tried to resist, but was powerless. Then came the torturing
thought, "If I repel him--if I act differently--he will guess the reason," and she was passive;
but he felt her slight form tremble.

"My poor little ghost, you are ill in very truth! I'm indeed sorry that I left you so long."

"Believe me, Graydon, I am ill. Please let that excuse me and explain. Oh, that I--I were strong,
like Miss Wildmere!"

"Isn't she a beauty?" exclaimed the unconscious Graydon. "The man who wins her might well be
proud, for he would have competitors by the score."

"Your chances seem excellent," said Madge, in a low tone.

He laughed complacently, but added: "You don't know these society belles. They can show a great
deal of favor to more than one fellow, yet never permit themselves to be pinned by a definite
promise. They are harder to catch and hold than a wild Bedouin; but such a girl as Miss Wildmere
is worth the effort. Yes, Madge, I do wish you were like her. It would be grand sport to champion
you in society and see you run amuck among the fellows. It's a thousand pities that you are
such an invalid. I've thought more than once that you were designed to be a beauty. With your
eyes and Stella Wildmere's health you would be quite as effective after your style as she is
in hers. Never mind, little sister, I shall stand by you, and as long as I live you shall always
have a luxurious sofa, with all the novels of the northern hemisphere at your command. Who
knows? You may grow strong one of these days. When you do I'll pick out the nice fellows for you."

At every kindly word her heart grew heavier, and when the carriage stopped at their door she
could hardly mount the steps. In the hall she faltered and caught the hat-rack for support.
He lifted her in his arms and bore her easily to her room, her sister following in much solicitude.
"It's nothing," said Madge; "the company was too large and exciting for me. There was no need
of Graydon's carrying me upstairs, but he would do it."

"You poor dear!" began her sister, broodingly. "I feared it would be so. Graydon is made of
iron, and will never realize how delicate you are."

"He's very kind, and more considerate than I deserve. As he says," she added, bitterly, "I'm
nothing but a ghost, and had better vanish."

"Nonsense, Madge," said the young man, with brusque kindness. "You know I want you to haunt
me always. Good-by now, little sister. I shall be de trop if I stay any longer. You'll be better
in the morning, and to-morrow evening I'll remain home and entertain you."

CHAPTER III

THE PARTING

At last Madge was alone. Her sister had suggested everything she could think of, meanwhile
bewailing the young girl's extreme imprudence. Madge entreated for quiet and rest, and at last
was left alone. Hour after hour she lay with wide, fixed gaze. Her mind and imagination did
not partake of her physical weakness, and now they were abnormally active. As the bewilderment
from the shock of her abrupt awakening passed, the truth hourly grew clearer. From the time
she had first come under her sister's roof Graydon Muir had begun to make himself essential
to her. His uniform kindness had created trust, freedom, and a content akin to happiness. Now
all was swept away. She understood that his love was an affection resulting from pity and the
strong, genial forces of his nature. The girl who could kindle his spirit and inspire the best
and most enthusiastic efforts of his manhood must be like Miss Wildmere--strong, beautiful,
capable of keeping step with him under society's critical eyes, and not a mere shadow of a
woman like herself. Her morbidly acute fancy recalled the ballroom. She saw him again after
his return, encircling the fair girl with his arm, and looking down into her eyes with a meaning
unmistakable. Oh, why had she gone to that fatal party! The past, in contrast to the present
and the promise of the future, seemed happiness itself.

What could she do? What should she do? The more she thought of it the more unendurable her
position appeared. In her vivid self-consciousness the old relations could not continue. Heretofore
his caresses had been a matter of course, of habit. They could be so no longer. She shrank
from them with inexpressible fear, knowing they would bring what little blood she possessed
to her face and very brow in tell-tale floods. The one event from which her sensitive womanhood
drew back in deepest dread was his knowledge of her love. To prevent this she would rather
die, and she felt so weak and despairing that she thought and almost hoped she would die. If
she could only go away, where she would not see him, and hide her wound! But how could she,
chained near his daily presence by weakness and helplessness?

Thus through the long night her despairing thoughts went to and fro, and found no rest. Miss
Wildmere's cold glance met her everywhere with the assurance that such a creature as she could
never be anything to him, and, alas! his own words confirmed the verdict. Love that gives all
demands all, and such pitiful affection as he now gave was only a mockery. The morning found
her too weak to leave her room, and for the few following days she made illness her excuse
for remaining in seclusion. As Graydon looked ruefully at her vacant chair the fourth evening
after the company, Mrs. Muir remarked, reproachfully, "I hope you now realize how delicate
Madge is. You never should have coaxed her to go to that party."

He was filled with compunction, and brought her flowers, boxes of candy, books, and everything
which he imagined would amuse her. At the same time he was growing a little impatient and provoked.
He knew that he had taken her from the kindest motives. Now that she gave up utterly to her
invalidism, he was inclined to question its necessity. He found that he missed her more than
he would have imagined, and his brief hours at home were dreary by reason of her seclusion.

"Why don't you call in a first-class physician and put Madge under a thorough course of treatment?"
he asked, irritably. "She has no disease now that I know anything about, and I don't believe
it's necessary that she should remain so weak and lackadaisical."

"We did have our doctor call often, and he said she would outgrow her troubles if she would
take plenty of fresh of fresh air and exercise. And now she positively refuses to see a physician."

"I wouldn't humor a sick girl's fancies. She needs tonics and a general building up. With your
permission I'll stop on my way downtown to-morrow and tell Dr. Anderson to call."

Mrs. Muir repeated the conversation to her sister, with the literalness of which only unimaginative
women are capable. Madge turned her face to the wall, and said, coldly and decisively, "I refuse
to see a physician. I am no longer a child, and my wishes must be respected." After a moment
she added, apologetically: "A doctor could do me no good. I shall soon be stronger. You understand
me better than Dr. Anderson can. You are the best and kindest nurse that ever breathed, and
I've had enough of doctors. I'll take anything you give me."

These politic words appealed to Mrs. Muir's weak point. Nothing pleased her better than to
believe that she could act the part of physician in the family, and prescribing for Madge was
a source of unflagging interest. When she informed Graydon of their decision in the morning,
he muttered something not very complimentary to either of the ladies; but his good-nature prevailed,
and instead of the doctor he ordered a superb bouquet of Jacqueminot roses.

Meanwhile events were taking place of which Madge had no knowledge, but which would favor the
plan slowly maturing in her mind. Mr. Muir's business affairs had been taking a turn which
made it probable that he would soon have to send his brother abroad. As long as there was uncertainty
the reticent man said nothing, but at last he received advices which brought him to a prompt
decision, and Graydon was told that he must go at once. The young fellow submitted with fairly
good grace. A brief foreign residence had its attractions, but it interfered with his incipient
suit to Miss Wildmere. He felt that he had not gone far enough for a definite proposal, but
he showed, during the brief call that his time permitted, an interest which the young lady
well understood. Since he was to be absent for an indefinite period, and would have no chance
to observe her other little affairs, she permitted herself to be gracious and regretful up
to the point of inspiring much hope for the future. With a nicety of tact--the result of experience--she
confirmed his view that they had made favorable impressions on each other, and that for the
present they must be content with this.

He had but a day in which to make his preparations in order to catch a fast steamer that sailed
at daylight the following morning. Madge's first sensation when she learned of his near departure
was one of immense relief. The possibility which she had so dreaded could not now be realized,
and her plan could be carried out with far less embarrassment. But as time passed, and she
knew that their separation was so near, her heart relented toward him with inexpressible tenderness.
The roses that perfumed the room were a type of his unstinted kindness and consideration. She
was just enough to acknowledge that these were even more than she could naturally expect from
him--that the majority of young men would have treated her with a half contemptuous pity which
she was now beginning to admit would be partially deserved. On the occasions when she had gone
out with him she had learned how unattractive in society her pale face and shy ways were. Such
attentions as she had received had been to her sensitive spirit like charity. Graydon had been
animated by unaffected good-will and an affection that was, after its kind, genuine. While
she felt that it would be no longer possible to receive these mild manifestations of regard
while giving something so different, she still knew, with a half despairing sinking of heart,
how blank and desolate her life would be without them. She must meet him once more, and word
was sent that she would receive his good-by after dinner. Having safely passed this one interview,
she hoped that she might be able to control the future, and either cease to be, or bring about
changes upon which she had resolved.

Only a soft, dim light shone in her room when he came to say farewell.

"Why, Madge," he exclaimed, "you are better! You actually have color. Perhaps it is fever,
though," he added, dubiously. "At any rate, it's very becoming."

"I think it must be the reflection from your roses there, you extravagant fellow," she replied,
laughing.

"That's famous, Madge. If you will laugh again like that I'll send you a present from Paris.
Dear Madge, do get well. Don't let us have anything dismal in our parting. It's only for a
little while, you know. When I come back it will be summer, and I'll take you to the seashore
or mountains or somewhere, and help you get well."

"You are very kind, Graydon. You have been a true brother to me from the time you tried to
cheer and encourage the pale, frightened little girl that sat opposite you at the dinner-table.
Don't you remember?"

"Of course I do. It seemed so droll to me that you were afraid when there was nothing to be
afraid of."

"My fear was natural. Little as I know of the world, I know that--at least for one like me.
It may seem weak and silly to you, but, brought up as I had been, I was morbidly sensitive.
You might have meant to be kind and sympathetic and all that, and yet have hurt me cruelly.
I have been out with you enough to know how I am regarded. I don't complain. I suppose it is
the way of the world, but it has not been your way. You have brought sunshine from the first,
not from a sense of duty, not out of sheer humiliating pity, but because it was the impulse
of your strength to help and cheer one who was so weak, and if--if--anything--Well, I want
you to know before you go away that I appreciate it all and shall never forget it."

"Oh, come, Madge, don't talk so dismally. What do you mean by 'if--if--anything'? You are going
to get strong and well, and we will open the campaign together next fall."

She shook her head, but asked, lightly, "How will Miss Wildmere endure your absence?"

"Easier than you, I imagine. She knows how to console herself. Still, as my little sister,
I will tell you in confidence that she was very kind in our parting interview. How much her
kindness meant only she herself knows, and I've been in society long enough to know that it
may mean very little."

"Are you so wholly bent upon winning her, Graydon?"

"Oh, you little Mother Eve! You are surely going to get well. There is no sign of longevity
in a woman so certain as curiosity. I've not yet reached the point of breaking my heart about
her, whatever she does. Wouldn't you like so beautiful a creature for your sister?"

"The contrast would be too great. I should indeed seem a ghost beside her. Still, if she would
make you happy--" But she could go no further.

"Well, well, that's a very uncertain problem of the future. Don't say anything about it at
home. My brother don't like her father. They do not get on well in business. Let us talk about
yourself. What are you going to do while I am gone?"

"What can such a shadow as I do? Tell me rather what you are going to do, and where you'll
be. You are real, and what you do amounts to something."

"There's one thing I'm going to do, and that is, write you some jolly letters that will make
you laugh in spite of yourself. They will be part of the tonic treatment that I want you to
promise me to begin at once."

"I have already entered upon it, Graydon," she said, quietly, "and I don't think any one will
value your letters more than I, only I may not get strong enough to write very much in reply.
I've never had occasion to write many letters, you know. Tell me where you will be and what
you are going to do," and she leaned back upon her lounge and closed her eyes.

While he complied, he thought, "She has grown pale and thin even to ghastliness, yet I was
sure she had color when I first came in. Poor little thing! perhaps her fears are well founded,
and I may never see her again;" and the good-hearted fellow was full of tender and remorseful
regret. He was quite as fond of her as if she had been his own sister, perhaps even more so,
for his affection was not merely the result of a natural tie, but of something congenial to
his nature in the girl herself, and it cut him to the heart to see her so white and frail.
He stopped a moment, and she opened her eyes and looked at him inquiringly.

"Oh, Madge," he broke out, "I'm so sorry I took you to that confounded party. You seemed getting
on hopefully until that blasted evening. You must get well enough to haunt me after your old
fashion. You don't know what a dear little sister you have become, and I didn't know it myself
until you were secluded by illness, and all through my fault. You have barricaded yourself
long enough with that stand and its vase of roses. I'm not going to say good-by at this distance."
He removed the stand, and seating himself by her side, he drew her head down upon his shoulder
and kissed her again and again. "There now," he continued, "you look perfectly lovely. Kisses
are a part of the tonic treatment you need, and I wish I were going to be here to give them.
Why, you queer little woman! I did not know you had so much blood in your body."

"It's--it's because I'm not strong," she said, struggling for release. Suddenly she became
still, her face took on almost the hue of death, and he saw that she was unconscious.

In terrible alarm he laid her hastily on the lounge, and rushed for Mrs. Muir.

"She has merely fainted," said that experienced woman, after a moment's examination. "You never
will learn, Graydon, that Madge is not as strong as yourself. Call one of the maids, and leave
her to me."

That was the last time he saw Madge Alden for more than two years. She soon rallied, but agreed
with her sister that it would be best not to see him again. She sent him one of his own roses,
with the simple message, "Good-by."

Late at night he went down to the steamer, depressed and anxious, carrying with him the vivid
memory of Madge lying white and death-like where he had laid her apparently lifeless form.

"I shall never see her again," he muttered. "Such weakness must be mortal."

CHAPTER IV

EFFORT

The deep experience, the touchstone of character, of latent power, if such existed, had come
to Madge Alden. For days she had drifted helplessly on the rising tide of an apparently hopeless
love. With every hour she comprehended more fully what Graydon Muir had become to her and all
that he might have been. It seemed that she had been carried forward by a strong, quiet current,
only to be wrecked at last. A sense of utter helplessness overwhelmed her. She could not ignore
her love; it had become interwoven with every interest and fibre of her life. At first she
contemplated it in wonder, in deeply troubled and alarmed perplexity. It was a momentous truth,
that had suddenly been made known as some irretrievable misfortune might have been revealed.
She had read of love as children hear of mental anxieties and conflicts of which they have
no comprehension. As she grew older it had been like poetry, music, romance--something that
kindled her imagination into vague, pleasant dreams. It had been as remote from the present
and her own experience as lives of adventure in strange and foreign lands. She had awakened
at last to find that it was like her vital breath. By some law of her nature she had given,
not merely her thoughts and affection, but her very self to another. To her dismay it made
no difference that he had not sought the gift and was not even aware of it. Circumstances over
which she had no control had brought her into close companionship with Graydon Muir. She had
seen him almost daily for years; she knew him with the intimacy of a sister, yet without the
safeguard of a natural tie; and from his genial kindness she had drawn almost all the life
she had ever possessed. With an unconsciousness akin to that of a plant which takes root and
thrives upon finding a soil adapted to it, her love had been developed by his strong, sunny
nature. She soon recognized that it was a love such as she had never known, unlike that for
her mother or sister or any one else, and it seemed to her that it could pass away only with
herself. It was not a vague sentiment, an indefinite longing; it was the concentrated and imperious
demand of her whole being, which, denied, left little indeed, even were the whole world hers.
Yet such were the cruel conditions of her lot that she could not speak of it even to one whose
head had been pillowed on the same mother's breast, and the thought that it might be discovered
by its object made her turn cold with dread. It was a holy thing--the spontaneous product of
an unperverted heart--and yet she must hide it as if it were a crime. 

So long as the State is Christian and the Jew is Jewish, both are equally incapable of granting
and receiving emancipation.

The Christian State can only behave towards the Jew in the manner of a Christian State, that
is in a privileged manner, by granting the separation of the Jew from the other subjects, but causing
him to feel the pressure of the other separated spheres, and all the more onerously inasmuch
as the Jew is in religious antagonism to the dominant religion.

But the Jew also can only conduct himself towards the State in a Jewish fashion, that is as a stranger,
by opposing his chimerical nationality to the real nationality, his illusory law to the real
law, by imagining that his separation from humanity is justified, by abstaining on principle
from all participation in the historical movement, by waiting on a future which has nothing
in common with the general future of mankind, by regarding himself as a member of the Jewish
people and the Jewish people as the chosen people.

Upon what grounds therefore do you Jews crave emancipation? On account of your religion? It
is the mortal enemy of the State religion. As citizens? There are no citizens in Germany. As men?
You are as little men as He on whom you called.

After giving a criticism of the previous positions and solutions of the question, Bauer has freshly
posited the question of Jewish emancipation. How, he asks, are they constituted, the Jew to
be emancipated, and the Christian State which is to emancipate?

He replies by a criticism of the Jewish religion, he analyses the religious antagonism between
Judaism and Christianity, he explains the nature of the Christian State, and all this with boldness,
acuteness, spirit, and thoroughness, in a style as precise as it
is forcible and energetic.

How then does Bauer solve the Jewish question? What is the result? The formulation of a question
is its solution. The criticism of the Jewish question is the answer to the Jewish question.

The
summary is therefore as follows:

We must emancipate ourselves before we are able to emancipate others.

The most rigid form of the antagonism between the Jew and the Christian is the religious antagonism. How
is this antagonism resolved? By making it impossible. How is a religious antagonism made impossible?
By abolishing religion.

As soon as Jew and Christian recognize their respective religions as different stages in the
development of the human mind, as different snake skins which history
has cast off, and men as the snakes encased therein, they stand no
longer in a religious relationship, but in a critical, a scientific,
a human one.

Science then constitutes their unity. Antagonisms in science, however, are resolved by science
itself.

The German Jew is particularly affected by the lack of political emancipation in general and the
pronounced Christianity of the State.

In Bauer's sense, however, the Jewish question has a general significance independent of the
specific German conditions.

It is the question of the relation of religion to the State, of the contradiction between religious
entanglement and political emancipation. Emancipation from religion is posited as a condition,
both for the Jews, who desire to be politically emancipated, and
for the State, which shall emancipate and itself be emancipated.

"Good, you say, and the Jew says so too, the Jew also is not to be emancipated as Jew, not because
he is a Jew, not because he has such an excellent, general, human principle of morality; the Jew
will rather retire behind the citizen and be a citizen, although he is a Jew and wants to remain
one: that is, he is and remains a Jew, in spite of the fact that he is a citizen and lives
in general human relationships: his Jewish and limited nature always and eventually triumphs over
his human and political obligations. The prejudice remains in spite of the fact that it has
been outstripped by general principles. If, however, it remains, it rather outstrips everything
else." "Only sophistically and to outward seeming would the Jew be able to remain a Jew in civic
life; if he desired to remain a Jew, the mere semblance would therefore
be the essential thing and would triumph, that is, his life in the
State would be only a semblance or a passing exception to the rule
and the nature of things"

("The Capacity of modern Jews and Christians to become free," p. 57).

Let us see, on the other hand, how Bauer describes the task of the
State: "France has recently (proceedings of the Chamber of Deputies,
26th December 1840) in connection with the Jewish question--as constantly
in all other political questions--given us a glimpse of a life which
is free, but revokes its freedom in law, and therefore asserts it
to be a sham, and on the other hand contradicts its free law by its
act."

"The Jewish Question," p. 64.

"General freedom is not yet legal in France, the Jewish question is not yet solved, because
legal freedom--that all citizens are equal--is limited in practice, which is still dominated
by religious privileges, and this unfreedom in practice reacts on the law, compelling the latter
to sanction the division of nominally free citizens into oppressed and oppressor," p. 65.

When, therefore, would the Jewish problem be solved for France?

"The Jew, for instance, must cease to be a Jew if he will not allow himself to be hindered by
his law from fulfilling his duties towards the State and his fellow-citizens, going, for example,
to the Chamber of Deputies on the Sabbath and taking part in the public sittings. Every religious
privilege, and consequently the monopoly of a privileged Church, must be surrendered, and if few or many
or even the great majority believe they ought still to perform religious duties, this performance
must be left to themselves as a private matter," p. 65. "When there is no longer a privileged
religion, there will no longer be a religion. Take from religion
its excommunicating power, and it exists no longer," p. 66.

On the one hand, Bauer states that the Jew must abandon Judaism, and that man must abandon religion,
in order to be emancipated as a citizen. On the other hand, he feels he is logical in interpreting
the political abolition of religion to mean the abolition of religion altogether. The State,
which presupposes religion, is as yet no true, no real State. "At any rate the religious idea
gives the State guarantees. But what State? What kind of State?" p. 97.

At this point we are brought up against the one-sided conception of the Jewish question.

It was by no means sufficient to inquire: Who shall emancipate? Who shall be emancipated? Criticism
had a third task to perform.

It had to ask: what kind of emancipation are we concerned with? Upon what conditions is the desired
emancipation based? The criticism of political emancipation itself was only the eventual criticism
of the Jewish question and its true solution, in the "general question of the time."

Because Bauer does not raise the question to this level he falls into contradictions. He posits
conditions which are not involved in the nature of political emancipation itself. He suggests questions
which his problem does not imply, and he solves problems which leave
his questions unsettled.

Whereas Bauer says of the opponents of Jewish emancipation: "Their mistake was that they assumed
the Christian State to be the only real State, and did not subject it to the same criticism
that they applied to Judaism," we find Bauer's mistake to consist in the fact that it is only
the Christian State, and not the "general State," that he subjects to criticism, that he does
not investigate the relation of political emancipation to human emancipation, and consequently
lays down conditions which are only explicable from an uncritical confusion of political emancipation
with general human emancipation.

When Bauer asks Jews: Have you the right from your standpoint to crave political emancipation?
we would inquire on the contrary: Has the standpoint of political emancipation the right to
demand of Jews the abolition of Judaism, or from men generally the
abolition of religion?

The complexion of the Jewish question changes according to the State in which Jews find themselves.
In Germany, where no political State, no State as State exists, the Jewish question is a purely
theological question. The Jew finds himself in religious antagonism to the State, which acknowledges
Christianity as its basis. This State is theologian ex professo. Here criticism is criticism of
theology, is two-edged criticism, criticism of Christian and criticism of Jewish theology. But however
critical we may be, we cannot get out of the theological circle.

In France, in the constitutional State, the Jewish question is the question of constitutionalism,
of the incompleteness of political emancipation. As the semblance of a State religion is there
preserved, although in a meaningless and self-contradictory formula, in the formula of a religion
of the majority, the relationship of Jews to the State retains the semblance of a religious
and theological antagonism.

It is only in the North American Free States--at least in part of
them--that the Jewish question loses its theological significance
and becomes a really secular question.

Only where the political State exists in its completeness can the relation of the Jew, of the
religious man generally, to the political State, and therefore the relation of religion to the
State, be studied in its special features and its purity. The criticism of this relationship ceases
to be theological criticism when the State ceases to adopt a theological attitude towards religion,
when its attitude towards religion becomes purely political. The criticism then becomes criticism
of the political State. At this point, where the question ceases to be theological, Bauer's criticism
ceases to be critical. In the United States there is neither a State religion nor a religion
declared to be that of the majority, nor the predominance of one cult over another. The State
is alien to all cults.

(Marie ou l'esclavage aux Etats-Unis, etc., by G. Beaumont, Paris 1835, p. 214.) There are even
North American States where "the constitution does not impose religious beliefs or the practice
of a cult as a condition of political privileges" (l. c. p. 225). Yet "nobody in the United
States believes that a man without religion might be an honest man" (l. c. p. 224). Yet North
America is pre-eminently the country of religiosity, as Beaumont, Tocqueville and the Englishman
Hamilton assure us with one voice. Meanwhile, the North American States only serve us as an example.
The question is: What is the attitude of completed political emancipation towards religion? If
even in the country of completed political emancipation we find religion not only existing, but
in a fresh and vital state, it proves that the existence of religion does not contradict the
completeness of the State. But as the existence of religion indicates the presence of a defect,
the source of this defect may only be looked for in the nature of the State. We are no longer
concerned with religion as the basis, but only as the phenomenon of secular shortcomings. Consequently
we explain the religious handicap of the free citizens from their secular handicap. We do not
assert that they must remove their religious handicap as soon as they cast off their secular
fetters. We do not transform secular questions into theological questions. We transform theological
questions into secular questions.

After history has for so long been dissolved in superstition, we dissolve the superstition
in history. The question of the relation of political emancipation becomes for us the question
of the relation of political emancipation to human emancipation. We criticize the religious weakness
of the political State by criticizing the political State in its secular construction, apart
from the religious weaknesses. We transmute the contradiction of the State with a specific religion,
like Judaism, into the contradiction of the State with specific secular elements, and the
contradiction of the State with religion generally into the contradiction of the State with its
general assumptions.

The political emancipation of the Jew, of the Christian, of the religious man in general, means
the emancipation of the State from Judaism, from Christianity, from religion generally. In
its form as State, in the manner peculiar to its nature, the State emancipates itself from religion
by emancipating itself from the State religion, that is, by the State as State acknowledging
no religion.

Political emancipation from religion is not a thorough-going and consistent emancipation from
religion, because political emancipation is not effectual and consistent human emancipation.

The
limit of political emancipation is immediately seen to consist in the fact that the State can cast
off a fetter without men really becoming free from it, that the State can become a free State without
men becoming free men. Bauer tacitly assents to this in laying down the following condition for
political emancipation. The State may therefore achieve emancipation from religion, although
the great majority are still religious. And the great majority do
not cease to be religious by being religious privately.

The political
elevation of the individual above religion shares all the defects
and all the advantages of political elevation generally. For example,
the State as State annuls private property, the individual declares
in a political manner that private property is abolished as soon as
he abolishes the census for active and passive eligibility, which
has been done in many North American States. Hamilton interprets this
fact quite correctly from the political standpoint: "The great multitude
has won the victory over the property owners and the monied men."
Is not private property ideally abolished when the have-nots become
the legislators of the haves? The census is the last political form
to recognize private property.

Yet private property is not only not
abolished with the political annulment of private property, but is
even implied therein. The State abolishes in its fashion the distinctions
of birth, status, education, and occupation when it declares birth,
status, education, and occupation to be unpolitical distinctions,
when, without taking account of these distinctions, it calls upon
every member of the community to participate in the popular sovereignty
on an equal footing, when it deals with all the elements of the real
popular life from the State's point of view. Nevertheless the State
leaves private property, education, occupation operating in their
own manner, that is, as education, as occupation, and developing their
potentialities.

From abolishing these actual distinctions, it rather
exists only upon their basis, and is conscious of being a political
State and enforcing its communal principle only in opposition to these
its elements. Consequently Hegel defines the relation of the political
State to religion quite correctly when he says: "If the State is to
have reality as the ethical, self-conscious realization of spirit,
it must be distinguished from the form of authority and faith. But
this distinction arises only in so far as the ecclesiastical side
is in itself divided into several churches. Then only is the State
seen to be superior to them, and wins and brings into existence the
universality of thought as the principle of its form." ("Philosophy
of Right," Eng. tr. p. 270.)

By its nature the completed political
State is the generic life of man in contradistinction to his material
life. All the assumptions of this egoistic life remain in existence
outside the sphere of the State, in bourgeois society, but as the
peculiarities of bourgeois society.
Of course there were some in whom even the broadest charity could find little to approve; but
it was her purpose to study and understand them and lose forever the unsophisticated ignorance
at which Graydon had used to laugh.

Santa Barbara was a winter resort, and she had the advantage of meeting many types. In Mrs.
Wayland she had a useful mentor. This lady in her younger days had been familiar with the best
phases of metropolitan society, and she counteracted in Madge all tendencies toward provincialism.
Thus it gradually became recognized that the "shy, sickly little girl," as she had been characterized
at first, was growing into a very attractive young woman. Indeed, after an absence of only
a year her own sister would scarcely have recognized her.

CHAPTER V

ACHIEVEMENT

Mrs. Muir of course heard often from her sister, and was satisfied with the general assurance
that she was better and steadily improving. Madge, however, was rather indefinite in her information.
As time passed, the idea of giving her friends in the East a surprise took possession of her
fancy. She instinctively felt that she needed every incentive to pursue the course she had
resolved upon, since she often suffered from fits of depression hard to combat. The hope of
appearing like a new being to her relatives was another innocent motive for her long-prolonged
effort. Circumstances had never developed epistolary tastes in the sisters, and they were content
with brief missives containing general assurances that all was well. Mrs. Muir was one of those
ladies who become engrossed with the actual and the present. Had Madge been in her old room
she would have been looked after with daily solicitude; being absent, she was loved none the
less, but was simply crowded from thought and memory by swarms of little cares. She was doing
well, and her sister was satisfied. "'It's a wonderful climate,' Madge writes," she would say,
"so even and dry. Madge doesn't take cold as she did here, and can go out nearly every day.
Perhaps we ought to become reconciled to the fact that she will have to live there always,
since here, with our sudden changes, she could scarcely live at all."

With the kindliest intentions Graydon had sought to initiate a vigorous correspondence. He
had learned with immense relief of Madge's improvement through change of residence, and he
felt that a series of jolly letters might bring aid and hopefulness. Her responses were not
very encouraging, however, and business cares, with the novelty of foreign life, gradually
absorbed his thoughts and time until correspondence languished and died.

"It's the old story," he thought, with a shade of irritation. "Letters cost effort, and she
is not equal to effort, or thinks she is not."

If he could have seen Madge at that moment riding like the wind on a spirited horse he would
have been more astonished than by any of the wonders of the old world. 

He died shortly after; and scandalous stories of her intimacy with her brother caused her removal
to Constantinople; but she came back again, and reigned long as the regent of her son, Valentinian
III.,--a feeble youth, who never grew to have either passions or talents, and was very likely,
as was said, enervated by his mother in dissolute indulgence, so that she might be supreme. But
she died at Rome in 450, much praised for her orthodoxy and her devotion to the Trinity. And
there was her daughter, Honoria, who ran off with a chamberlain, and afterward offered to
throw herself into the arms of Attila who wouldn't take her as a gift at first, but afterward
demanded her, and fought to win her and her supposed inheritance. But they were a bad lot altogether;
and it is no credit to a Christian of the nineteenth century to stay in this tomb so long.

Near this mausoleum is the magnificent Basilica of St. Vitale, built in the reign of Justinian,
and consecrated in 547, I was interested to see it because it was erected in confessed imitation
of St. Sophia at Constantinople, is in the octagonal form, and has all the accessories of Eastern
splendor, according to the architectural authorities. Its effect is really rich and splendid;
and it rather dazzled us with its maze of pillars, its upper and lower columns, its galleries,
complicated capitals, arches on arches, and Byzantine intricacies. To the student of the very early
ecclesiastical art, it must be an object of more interest than even of wonder. But what I cared
most to see were the mosaics in the choir, executed in the time of Justinian, and as fresh and
beautiful as on the day they were made. The mosaics and the exquisite arabesques on the roof of
the choir, taken together, are certainly unequaled by any other early church decoration I have
seen; and they are as interesting as they are beautiful. Any description of them is impossible;
but mention may be made of two characteristic groups, remarkable for execution, and having
yet a deeper interest.

In one compartment of the tribune is the figure of the Emperor Justinian, holding a vase with
consecrated offerings, and surrounded by courtiers and soldiers. Opposite is the figure of
the Empress Theodora, holding a similar vase, and attended by ladies of her court. There is a refinement
and an elegance about the empress, a grace and sweet dignity, that
is fascinating.

This is royalty,--stately and cold perhaps: even the mouth may be a little cruel, I begin to
perceive, as I think of her; but she wears the purple by divine right. I have not seen on
any walls any figure walking out of history so captivating as this lady, who would seem to
have been worthy of apotheosis in a Christian edifice. Can there be any doubt that this lovely woman
was orthodox? She, also, has a story, which you doubtless have been recalling as you read.
Is it worth while to repeat even its outlines? This charming regal woman was the daughter of
the keeper of the bears in the circus at Constantinople; and she early went upon the stage as a
pantomimist and buffoon.

She was beautiful, with regular features, a little pale, but with a tinge of natural color, vivacious
eyes, and an easy motion that displayed to advantage the graces of her small but elegant figure.
I can see all that in the mosaic. But she sold her charms to whoever cared to buy them in
Constantinople; she led a life of dissipation that cannot be even hinted at in these days;
she went off to Egypt as the concubine of a general; was deserted, and destitute even to misery
in Cairo; wandered about a vagabond in many Eastern cities, and won the reputation everywhere
of the most beautiful courtesan of her time; reappeared in Constantinople; and, having, it
is said, a vision of her future, suddenly took to a pretension of virtue and plain sewing; contrived
to gain the notice of Justinian, to inflame his passions as she did those of all the world besides,
to captivate him into first an alliance, and at length a marriage. The emperor raised her to an
equal seat with himself on his throne; and she was worshiped as empress in that city where
she had been admired as harlot. And on the throne she was a wise woman, courageous and chaste;
and had her palaces on the Bosphorus; and took good care of her beauty, and indulged in the pleasures
of a good table; had ministers who kissed her feet; a crowd of women
and eunuchs in her secret chambers, whose passions she indulged; was
avaricious and sometimes cruel; and founded a convent for the irreclaimably
bad of her own sex, some of whom liked it, and some of whom threw
themselves into the sea in despair; and when she died was an irreparable
loss to her emperor.

So that it seems to me it is a pity that the historian should say that she was devout, but a
little heretic.

A HIGH DAY IN ROME

PALM SUNDAY IN ST. PETER'S

The splendid and tiresome ceremonies of Holy Week set in; also the rain, which held up for two
days. Rome without the sun, and with rain and the bone-penetrating damp cold of the season, is
a wretched place. Squalor and ruins and cheap splendor need the sun; the galleries need it;
the black old masters in the dark corners of the gaudy churches need it; I think scarcely anything of
a cardinal's big, blazing footman, unless the sun shines on him,
and radiates from his broad back and his splendid calves; the models,
who get up in theatrical costumes, and get put into pictures, and
pass the world over for Roman peasants (and beautiful many of them
are), can't sit on the Spanish Stairs in indolent pose when it rains;
the streets are slimy and horrible; the carriages try to run over
you, and stand a very good chance of succeeding, where there are no
sidewalks, and you are limping along on the slippery round cobble-stones;
you can't get into the country, which is the best part of Rome: but
when the sun shines all this is changed; the dear old dirty town exercises,
its fascinations on you then, and you speedily forget your recent
misery.

Holy Week is a vexation to most people.

All the world crowds here to see its exhibitions and theatrical shows, and works hard to catch
a glimpse of them, and is tired out, if not disgusted, at the end. The things to see and hear
are Palm Sunday in St. Peter's; singing of the Miserere by the pope's choir on Wednesday, Thursday,
and Friday in the Sistine Chapel; washing of the pilgrims' feet in a chapel of St. Peter's, and
serving the apostles at table by the pope on Thursday, with a papal benediction from the balcony
afterwards; Easter Sunday, with the illumination of St. Peter's in the evening; and fireworks
(this year in front of St. Peter's in Montorio) Monday evening. Raised seats are built up about
the high altar under the dome in St. Peter's, which will accommodate a thousand, and perhaps more,
ladies; and for these tickets are issued without numbers, and for
twice as many as they will seat.

Gentlemen who are in evening dress are admitted to stand in the reserved places inside the lines
of soldiers. For the Miserere in the Sistine Chapel tickets are also issued. As there is only
room for about four hundred ladies, and a thousand and more tickets are given out, you may
imagine the scramble. Ladies go for hours before the singing begins, and make a grand rush
when the doors are open. I do not know any sight so unseemly and cruel as a crowd of women intent
on getting in to such a ceremony: they are perfectly rude and unmerciful to each other. They
push and trample one another under foot; veils and dresses are torn; ladies faint away in the
scrimmage, and only the strongest and most unscrupulous get in. I have heard some say, who have
been in the pellmell, that, not content with elbowing and pushing and pounding, some women even
stick pins into those who are in the way. I hope this latter is not true; but it is certain
that the conduct of most of the women is brutal. A weak or modest or timid woman stands no
more chance than she would in a herd of infuriated Campagna cattle. The same scenes are enacted
in the efforts to see the pope wash feet, and serve at the table. For the possession of the seats
under the dome on Palm Sunday and Easter there is a like crush. The ceremonies do not begin until
half-past nine; but ladies go between five and six o'clock in the morning, and when the passages
are open they make a grand rush. The seats, except those saved for the nobility, are soon all
taken, and the ladies who come after seven are lucky if they can
get within the charmed circle, and find a spot to sit down on a campstool.

They can then see only a part of the proceedings, and have a weary, exhausting time of it for
hours. This year Rome is more crowded than ever before. There are American ladies enough to fill
all the reserved places; and I fear they are energetic enough to get their share of them.

It rained Sunday; but there was a steady stream of people and carriages all the morning pouring
over the Bridge of St. Angelo, and discharging into the piazza of St. Peter's. It was after nine when
I arrived on the ground. There was a crowd of carriages under the colonnades, and a heavy fringe
in front of them; but the hundreds of people moving over the piazza, and up the steps to the
entrances, made only the impression of dozens in the vast space. I do not know if there are people
enough in Rome to fill St. Peter's; certainly there was no appearance of a crowd as we entered,
although they had been pouring in all the morning, and still thronged the doors. I heard a traveler
say that he followed ten thousand soldiers into the church, and then lost them from sight: they
disappeared in the side chapels. He did not make his affidavit as to the number of soldiers.
The interior area of the building is not much greater than the square
of St. Mark in Venice.

To go into the great edifice is almost like going outdoors. Lines of soldiers kept a wide passage
clear from the front door away down to the high altar; and there was a good mass of spectators
on the outside. The tribunes for the ladies, built up under the dome, were of course, filled
with masses of ladies in solemn black; and there was more or less of a press of people surging about
in that vicinity. Thousands of people were also roaming about in the great spaces of the edifice;
but there was nowhere else anything like a crowd.

It had very much the appearance of a large fair-ground, with little crowds about favorite booths.
Gentlemen in dress-coats were admitted to the circle under the dome. The pope's choir was stationed
in a gallery there opposite the high altar. Back of the altar was a wide space for the dignitaries;
seats were there, also, for ambassadors and those born to the purple; and the pope's seat was
on a raised dais at the end. Outsiders could see nothing of what went on within there; and the
ladies under the dome could only partially see, in the seats they had fought so gallantly to obtain.

St.
Peter's is a good place for grand processions and ceremonies; but
it is a poor one for viewing them.

A procession which moves down the nave is hidden by the soldiers
who stand on either side, or is visible only by sections as it passes:
there is no good place to get the grand effect of the masses of color,
and the total of the gorgeous pageantry.

I should like to see the display upon a grand stage, and enjoy it in a coup d'oeil. It is a
fine study of color and effect, and the groupings are admirable; but the whole affair is nearly
lost to the mass of spectators. It must be a sublime feeling to one in the procession to walk about
in such monstrous fine clothes; but what would his emotions be if
more people could see him!

The grand altar stuck up under the dome not only breaks the effect of what would be the fine
sweep of the nave back to the apse, but it cuts off all view of the celebration of the mass behind
it, and, in effect, reduces what should be the great point of display in the church to a mere
chapel.

And when you add to that the temporary tribunes erected under the dome for seating the ladies,
the entire nave is shut off from a view of the gorgeous ceremony of high mass. The effect would
be incomparable if one could stand in the door, or anywhere in the nave, and, as in other churches,
look down to the end upon a great platform, with the high altar and all the sublime spectacle
in full view, with the blaze of candles and the clouds of incense rising in the distance.

At half-past nine the great doors opened, and the procession began, in slow and stately moving fashion,
to enter.

One saw a throng of ecclesiastics in robes and ermine; the white plumes of the Guard Noble; the
pages and chamberlains in scarlet; other pages, or what not, in black short-clothes, short swords,
gold chains, cloak hanging from the shoulder, and stiff white ruffs;
thirty-six cardinals in violet robes, with high miter-shaped white
silk hats, that looked not unlike the pasteboard "trainer-caps" that
boys wear when they play soldier; crucifixes, and a blazoned banner
here and there; and, at last, the pope, in his red chair, borne on
the shoulders of red lackeys, heaving along in a sea-sicky motion,
clad in scarlet and gold, with a silver miter on his head, feebly
making the papal benediction with two upraised fingers, and moving
his lips in blessing.

As the pope came in, a supplementary choir of men and soprano hybrids, stationed near the door,
set up a high, welcoming song, or chant, which echoed rather finely through the building. All
the music of the day is vocal.

The procession having reached its destination, and disappeared behind the altar of the dome,
the pope dismounted, and took his seat on his throne. The blessing of the palms began, the cardinals
first approaching, and afterwards the members of the diplomatic corps,
the archbishops and bishops, the heads of the religious orders, and
such private persons as have had permission to do so.

I had previously seen the palms carried in by servants in great baskets.

It is, perhaps, not necessary to say that they are not the poetical
green waving palms, but stiff sort of wands, woven out of dry, yellow,
split palm-leaves, sometimes four or five feet in length, braided
into the semblance of a crown on top,--a kind of rough basket-work.

The palms having been blessed, a procession was again formed down
the nave and out the door, all in it "carrying palms in their hands,"
the yellow color of which added a new element of picturesqueness to
the splendid pageant.

The pope was carried as before, and bore in his hand a short braided palm, with gold woven in,
flowers added, and the monogram "I. H. S." worked in the top. It is the pope's custom to give this
away when the ceremony is over.

Last year he presented it to an American lady, whose devotion attracted him; this year I saw it
go away in a gilded coach in the hands of an ecclesiastic. The procession disappeared through
the great portal into the vestibule, and the door closed. In a moment somebody knocked three
times on the door: it opened, and the procession returned, and moved
again to the rear of the altar, the singers marching with it and chanting.

The cardinals then changed their violet for scarlet robes; and high mass, for an hour, was celebrated
by a cardinal priest: and I was told that it was the pope's voice that we heard, high and clear,
singing the passion.

The choir made the responses, and performed at intervals. The singing was not without a certain
power; indeed, it was marvelous how some of the voices really filled the vast spaces of the edifice,
and the choruses rolled in solemn waves of sound through the arches. The singing, with the
male sopranos, is not to my taste; but it cannot be denied that it had a wild and strange
effect

.
 She often has great powers of discernment, but will not take the trouble
to use them, unless prompted by her own interests. Selfishness is too short-sighted, however,
to secure lasting benefits. Usually, nothing is more fatal than the success of mere self-seeking.
While Madge pressed unwaveringly toward the goal of her hopes, she did not do so in thoughtless
or callous indifference toward those who had true claims upon her. With her sister she soon
saw that all was well--that she was, as before, absorbed and content with the routine of her
life. She was not so sure about her brother-in-law. During her absence lines of care had appeared
in his face, and there was an abstracted and sometimes a troubled look in his eyes, as if he
was pursued by questions that were importunate and even threatening. The indications of perturbation
were slight indeed, but from his nature they would be so in any case. Thus the young girl also
received an impression which awakened a faint solicitude. Mr. Muir, as her guardian and the
manager of her property, had been a true friend and loyal to his trust. She entertained for
him much respect and a strong, quiet affection. He did not dwell in her thoughts merely as
one who was useful to her, but rather as one who had been true to her, and to whom she in her
place and way would be true and sympathetic were there occasion.

Madge was wearied indeed by her long journey, but not exhausted. In sensations so different
from those which had followed her journey to the West she recognized her immeasurable gain.
Then she had entered Mrs. Wayland's cottage helpless, hopeless, a fugitive from her own weakness.
By wise endeavor she had transformed that very weakness into her strength, and had returned
to the scenes from which she had fled earnest and resolute--one who had made her choice for
life and would abide by it. Womanly to her very finger-tips, she was acting with the aggressive
decision of a man. Sensitive and timid beyond most women, she would not lose her happiness
when it might be won in paths not only hedged about by all the proprieties of her lot, but
also by a reserve and pride with which her own fine nature was pre-eminently endowed. That
she loved Graydon Muir was a truth for life. If he could learn to love her from what she had
sought to be, from what she simply was, he should have the chance. Her own deep experience
had taught her much and given her the clew to many things. She had studied life, not only in
books, but in its actual manifestations. Mrs. Wayland was a social mine in herself, and could
recall from the past, volumes of dispassionate gossip, free from malice. In two years Madge
had learned to know the world better than many who are in contact with it for long periods,
but who see all through the distorted medium of their own prejudices or exceptional experiences.
Although she was no longer unsophisticated she was neither cynical nor optimistic. Before her
hope could be fulfilled she knew she must enter society, and she studied it thoughtfully--its
whims and meannesses as well as its laws and refinements. If she ever reached Graydon's side
she meant to stand there with a knowledge and confidence as assured as his own. She soon learned
that it is common enough for women to seek to win men by every alluring and coquettish device.
She would employ no devices whatever. She would merely reappear above his horizon among other
luminaries, and shine with her own pure, unborrowed light. Then it must depend upon himself
whether she ever became his own "bright particular star."

So much she felt she had a right to do, and no conventional hesitation as to her course stood
in her way. Her love had become the governing impulse of her life, and its dictates were imperative
until they trenched upon her sensitive, womanly pride. Then they were met as the rock meets
the tide. She did not care what the world might think: it should never have occasion to think
at all. Her secret was between herself and God. Graydon himself should never know it unless
his name became hers.

How vividly her old haunts recalled him! There was the lounge on which he used to toss the
"little wraith" after having carried her around in the semblance of a waltz. The sofa on which
had taken place their strange parting still stood as of old in her room. There her head had
sunk in unconsciousness upon his breast, the result of her vain, feeble struggle to escape
from caresses so natural to him, but no longer to be received by her.

What way-marks in life mute, commonplace things become in the light of memory! To her vivid
fancy Graydon was again present in all the positions now made memorable by deep affection.
The past unrolled itself again as it had so often done before. She saw the pallid, frightened
child that scarcely dared to look deprecatingly at the handsome young collegian. She saw again
the kind yet mirthful eyes that beamed encouragingly upon her. She remembered that in the unworthy
past they had ever looked upon her with a large, gentle, affectionate tolerance, and she now
took chiefly upon herself the blame for those years of weakness. Her present radiant health
and beauty proved how unnecessary they had been, and her heart sometimes sunk at the thought
of what they might cost her.

Mary had accompanied her to her room, and was asked, in a careless tone, what had become of
Miss Wildmere.

"I was told incidentally the other day that she was as great a belle as ever. I had hoped that
she would be out of Graydon's way before this time. I have heard, however, that great belles
are often slower in marrying than the homeliest girls. If all is true that is said, this Miss
Wildmere has made mischief enough; but I am not anxious that our Graydon should cut short her
career--that is, if marriage would cut it short. I imagine she will always be a gay society
woman. Well, Madge, I suppose you must make up your mind to be a belle yourself. Why don't
you cut out this 'speculator,' as my husband calls her? If Graydon had my eyes it wouldn't
be a difficult task."

"Graydon hasn't your eyes or mine either," was the brusque reply. "I propose to use my own.
They may see some one that I have never met. One thing at least is certain--I don't intend
to cut out Miss Wildmere or any one else. The man who wins me will have to do the seeking most
emphatically; and I warn you beforehand, sister mine, that you must never let the idea of matchmaking
enter your head. Since I have been away I have developed more will of my own than muscle. There
is no necessity for me ever to marry, and if I do it will be because I wish to, not because
any one else wants me to. Nothing would set me against a man more certainly than to see that
he had allies who were manoeuvring in his behalf;" and she concluded with a kiss that robbed
her words of a point too sharp, perhaps, for her sister's feelings. She knew Mrs. Muir's peculiarities
well enough, however, to believe that such words were needed, and she had intended to speak
them in some form at the earliest opportunity. Therefore she was glad that she could utter
the warning so early and naturally in their new relations. Nor was it uncalled for, since the
thought of bringing Madge and Graydon together had already entered Mrs. Muir's mind. A scheme
of this character would grow in fascination every hour. Poor Madge was well aware that, with
the best intentions, no one could more certainly blast her hopes than her sister, whose efforts
would be unaccompanied by the nicest tact. Moreover, any such attempts might involve the disclosure
of her secret.

"Well, you have changed in every respect," said Mary, looking at her wonderingly.

"For the better, I hope. My feeling in this respect, however, seems to me perfectly natural.
I don't see how a self-respecting girl could endure anything except a straightforward, downright
suit, with plenty of time to make up her own mind. I can do without the man who does not think
me worthy of this, and could probably do without him any way. Because a man wants to marry
a girl is only one reason for assent, and there may be a dozen reasons to the contrary."

"Why, Madge, how you talk! When you left us it seemed as if any one might pick you up and marry
you and you would not have spirit enough to say yes or no. Have you had to refuse any one at
Santa Barbara? Perhaps you didn't refuse. You have told me so little of what was going on!"

"That isn't fair to me, Mary. I explained to you that I wished to give you a pleasant surprise.
To plan a pleasure for you was not unsisterly, was it? I haven't Miss Wildmere's ambition for
miscellaneous conquests. Why should I write about men for whom I cared nothing and toward whom
my manner should have made my spoken negative unnecessary?"

"Other girls would. Well, it seems that their suit was downright enough to satisfy you. Good
gracious! How many were there?"

Madge laughed, yawned, and her sister saw that her dark eyes were full of the languor of sleep,
which added to their beauty.

"Oh, not many," she drawled. "I'll gossip about them some time when not so tired. I'll indicate
them by numerals. Why should I babble their names in connection with what they called so sacred?
I wonder how many like sacred affairs had occurred before. If I tell you the story of the wooing
of Number One, Two, Three, and so on, that will answer just as well, won't it?"

"No, indeed. I wish to know their names, family connection, and whether they were well off or not."

Madge again laughed, and began to disrobe, in order to indicate that their confidence must
at least be adjourned for the present. Her sister came and felt her perfect arms and rounded,
gleaming shoulders. "Why, Madge," she exclaimed, "your flesh is as white and smooth as ivory,
and almost as firm to the touch! It's a wonderful transformation. I can scarcely believe, much
less understand it. You have grown so beautiful that you almost turn even my head."

"There is nothing so wonderful about it, Mary. Almost any girl may win health, and therefore
more or less beauty, if she has the sense and will to make the effort. You know what I was
when I left home. I suggested doctors' bills more than anything else, and it was chiefly my
fault;" and she sighed deeply. "When I went to work in a rational way to get strong, I succeeded.
I believe this would be true with the great majority. Good-night, dear. When I am rested I'm
going to help you in many ways, in return for all you did for that lazy, lackadaisical, limp
little nonentity that you used to dose and coddle when you should have given her a good shaking."

"It's all a miracle," said Mrs. Muir to her husband, at the conclusion of lengthy remarks about
Madge.

"As much a miracle as my fortune," was the quiet reply. "Madge has had sense enough to know
what she wanted and how to get it."

CHAPTER VII

NOT A MIRACLE

Madge was simply fatigued from her long journey, and not oppressed with want of sleep, for
in passing through uninteresting portions of the country she had given herself up to repose.
The sense of weariness passed with the hours of night, and she was among the earliest stirring
in the morning. Long before breakfast was ready she had her trunks partially unpacked, her
mind meantime busy with plans for immediate action. At last her healthful appetite so asserted
itself that she went down to the dining-room. Mr. and Mrs. Muir had not yet appeared, and she
strolled into the parlor, opened her piano, and played a few runs. She found it sadly out of
tune from long disuse. As this was not true of her voice, she began singing a favorite German song.

In a moment the house was full of melody. Clear, sweet, and powerful, her notes penetrated
to the kitchen, where the maids were busy, and they stopped in spellbound wonder, with dish
or utensil in hand. Mrs. Muir listened with her hair-brush suspended, while methodical Mr.
Muir laid down his razor, and, going to the door, set it ajar. The song poured into the room
like an harmonic flood. Before the first stanza was completed Mrs. Muir had on her dressing-gown
and was stealing downstairs into the back parlor, and as Madge was beginning again she rushed
upon her.

"Why, why," she exclaimed, "I thought Nilsson or Patti had got lost and taken refuge here!
Can it be you? You are nothing but a surprise from beginning to end. When will the wonders
cease? Are you sure that you are Madge?"

"Yes, and equally sure that I am hungry. When will you be ready for breakfast? I've been up
these two hours."

"Well, well, well, what will Graydon say? He thinks you are still little better than a ghost."

"He will say that I have been very sensible, and he will find me very substantial and matter-of-fact.
The question now uppermost is, When will breakfast be ready?" cried the young girl, laughing,
in a childlike enjoyment of her sister's wonder, and a loving woman's anticipation of triumph
over the man who had once called her "weak and lackadaisical."

She responded warmly to the embrace of Mrs. Muir, who added, "You have come back to us a princess.
Why, even Henry, whom nothing moves out of the even tenor of his way, paused in his shaving,
and with one side of his face all lathered opened the door to listen."

"You tell him," cried Madge, in merry vein, "that he has given me the greatest compliment I
ever received. But compliments are not breakfast."

Mrs. Muir returned to complete her toilet, and her husband soon appeared.

"Madge," he said, greeting her kindly, "you have brought about great changes. How have you
accomplished them all in so brief a time?"

"The time has not been so very brief," she replied. "I have been away over two years, remember.
It's all very simple, Henry. I went to work to get well and to learn something, as you give
your mind and time to business. In the Waylands, my old German professor, and especially in
the magnificent climate I had splendid allies. And you know I had nothing else to do. One can
do a great deal in two years with sufficient motive and steady effort toward a few points."

"What was your motive, Madge?"

A slow, deep color stole into her face, but she looked unflinchingly into his eyes as she asked,
"Was not the hope of being what I am to-day, compared with what I was, sufficient motive?"

"Yes," he replied, thoughtfully, "it was; but it appears strange to me that more girls do not
show your sense. Nine-tenths of the pallid creatures that I see continue half alive through
their own fault."

"If they knew the pleasure of being thoroughly alive," said Madge, "they wouldn't dawdle another
hour. I believe that I might have regained health long before if I had set about it."

"Well, Madge, as your guardian I wish to tell you that I am deeply gratified. You have done
more for yourself than all the world could do for you. I am a plain man, you know, and not
given to many words. There is only one thing that I detest more than a silly woman, and that
is a heartless, speculating one. Both are sure to make trouble sooner or later. You certainly
do not belong to the first type, and I don't believe you will ever make a bad use of the beauty
you have won so honestly. Let me give you a bit of business experience, Madge. I have seen
men falter and fail by the score downtown, and usually it was because women were playing the
mischief with them--too often women of their own households, who had no more idea of the worth
of a dollar, or how it is obtained, than a kitten. The one idea is to marry for money, and
then to spend it in parade. I believe you will be like your sister Mary, who has given me a
home, quiet, and peace." ("If I ever give a man anything I'll give him a great deal more than
that," Madge thought.) "And now," concluded Mr. Muir, "speaking of money, I wish to go over
your accounts with you soon, that you may know everything and understand everything. It's absurd
for women to be helpless and dependent in this respect. You should know all about your property,
and the time has come when you should learn what are regarded as safe investments, and what
are not. My life is as uncertain as any other man's, and I intend that you sisters shall not
be like two children, who must do blindly what some trustee tells you to do;" and Mr. Muir
complacently led the way to the breakfast-room, feeling that as guardian he had done his duty
both morally and financially.

It was his way to speak plainly and promptly all he desired to say, and then, according to
his creed, if people had sense they would do what was wise; if they had not, the less said
the better.

Mrs. Muir was voluble during the morning meal. Now that Madge had come again within the sphere
of her domestic energy, she was fall of plans and projects.

"Of course," she said, "you have nothing to wear. The outlandish dresses that you had made
at that jumping-off place in the West won't answer. As soon as the Waylands have made their
call we must go out and begin ordering your summer outfit. Perhaps Mrs. Wayland will go with us."

"Patience, Mary. We are not ready to order outfits yet."

"Why not?"

"Because we do not want to buy what interested shopmen and milliners may choose to palm off
on us. You live such a domestic life that you are scarcely better informed than I as to the
latest modes. We will drive in the park, use our eyes on the avenue, and visit several fashionable
establishments first. Then I wish to find a dressmaker who is not an idiotic slave of fashion,
and who can modify the prevailing styles by taste and appreciation of the person for whom she
works. The one whom I employ must make dresses for me and under my direction, and not dresses
in the abstract, as if they were for the iron-framed form on which she exhibits her wares."

"Good!" cried Mr. Muir; "Madge's head is level. Let her have her own way, Mary, and she will
come out all right."

"Well," said Mrs. Muir, "I suppose it will take a little time for me to get used to all these
changes. Before she went away I used to do everything for her. I'm going to have my own way
in one thing, however. You must not write to Graydon a word beyond the fact that Madge is here.
You have both laughed at me and my wonder, and I'm going to have the compensation of seeing
him transformed into exclamation points."

Madge now turned toward Mr. Muir, and he could detect not the slightest indication of embarrassment
or overconsciousness, as she said, "Certainly, Henry, you must not spoil this little bit of
prospective fun."

Madge did have her own way, and made her preparations with the quiet decision and thoughtfulness
which now characterized her actions.

The Waylands were frequent guests at Mr. Muir's home for a time, and then departed to visit
friends in the country.

Madge and her sister soon decided upon the Catskills as the place of their summer sojourn.
The choice of this region, so accessible from the city, was pleasing to Mr. Muir.

"What are you reading?" he said, one evening, as he found Madge surrounded by books and pamphlets.

"Reading up on the Catskills and their vicinity. A place is far more interesting if you have
associations with it, and I intend to be versed in all the stories and legends of the region.
In this I have a little design upon you also. You look worn, Henry, and need rest and change.
You are too much devoted to business. I'm going to 'frivol,' like the rest of the girls, in
the evening--dance, and all that, you know, but I shall try to keep you among the hills, and
inveigle you into long drives and walks by telling you exciting yarns that will take the place
of the dissipations of business. You needn't think you will have to mope around the piazza,
your body on a mountain and your mind in Wall Street. You are getting old and rich, and you
must begin to take an interest in other things besides business."

"Now, that's thoughtful and kind of you," he said, and then he lapsed into a revery that the
contraction of his brow showed to be not altogether agreeable.

At last he said, "Madge, I half believe you are right. I am and have been too devoted to business.
It's all very well as long as you can drive it, but when it begins to drive you it is a hard
task-master. The times are bad. Instead of making anything, one has to use all his faculties
to keep from losing what he has made. It's getting to be a grind. I sometimes wish I was out
of it, but suppose I shouldn't know what to do with myself."

"That's just it, Henry, you wouldn't. You must become interested in other things, and that's
a process which requires time, and I'll help you."

"Oh, you," he said, laughing--"you will soon have all you can do to keep your beaux at bay."

"Beaux in this free and enlightened land have only certain rights which a girl is bound to
respect. Should there be any, and they unreasonable, you'll see," she said, with a little decisive
nod. Then she added, gravely: "I don't believe you would be content out of business, but I
should think there was such a thing as trying to do so much business that it would become a
burden, and, perhaps, a heavy one. You may think I'm a little goose, talking of what I know
nothing about; but I've read a great deal, and, of late, books worth reading. I don't believe
it is a good thing to change one's habits and pursuits suddenly; and what's more, Henry, I
believe that when the times are better business will be as great a source of satisfaction to
you as ever. As I suggested before, you must gradually become interested in other things which
can take the place of business as you grow old."

"What a wise little woman we have become!" said Mr. Muir. "Here you are giving your guardian
sound advice--you who, I imagined once, would take no more thought for the morrow than a lily
of the field, and a very pale one at that. This is a greater change than any that Mary exclaims
about."

"Perhaps you think me very presuming," answered Madge, coloring.

"No, I do not. I think you very sensible, and I think myself very fortunate in having such
women in my household as you and Mary. I was blue when I came home to-night, but it inspirits
a man to talk to such a girl. You have a power of good common-sense, Madge."

"Well, I have--I had--need of it."

"The majority would say you could afford to be silly. You have a snug fortune of your own,
of which not a penny can be lost unless the bottom falls out of everything."

"I don't think any woman can afford to be silly. I know that's a sweeping word with you, and
covers all feminine folly. What I meant is this: Money and every good thing in life was a mockery.
I couldn't enjoy anything, and wasn't anything but a burden. I saw it all, and that I should
have to throw nonsense overboard if I wished to be different. You will find that I have plenty
left, however, before the summer's over. Now, let me read to you Irving's legend of poor old
Rip. What if you have read it often? A little infusion of the champion sleeper's spirit is
just what you need;" and with simple purity of tone and naturalness of accent she made the
old story new to him.

"Madge," he said, as he kissed her good-night, "that is even better than your singing. I feel
so freshened and heartened up that I'm another man, and in good trim for the fight to-morrow;
for that is just what business has become--a regular defensive fight. You didn't think two
years ago that you would send me down to Wall Street with a clearer head and better courage."

"No, indeed, I didn't dream of it, and I can scarcely believe it's true now. You used to seem
to me like gravitation, that would always be the same to the end of time."

"Bah! A man is only a man, and he finds it out sooner or later. There's Jack crying again,
and Mary hasn't had a chance to come down. I'll take the child, for his teeth make him so nervous
that he won't stay with the nurse."

"I'll try my hand at him to-morrow," said the young girl, and was absorbed in her reading again.

The days passed quickly, and Madge filled them full, as before at Santa Barbara. As the time
approached for Graydon's return, she felt a quiet rising excitement akin to that which inspires
a soldier when a campaign is about to open; but to her brother-in-law and sister she gave only
the impression of decision of character and youthful, healthful buoyancy. She was good-cheer
itself in the household, and helpful in every little domestic emergency. The servants and the
children welcomed her like sunshine, and she made the evenings all too short by music and reading
aloud. She blossomed out in her summer costumes like a flower, so becoming to her style had
been her choice of fabrics and the taste with which they had been fashioned. June was passing.
In a day or two more Graydon would arrive, and the fruition or failure of her patient endeavor
begin.

CHAPTER VIII

RIVAL GIRLS

Instead of Graydon there came a letter saying that he would be detained abroad another week.
The heat was oppressive, and the family physician said that little Jack should be taken to
the country at once. Therefore they packed in haste, and started for a hotel in the Catskills
at which rooms had been engaged. Graydon was to join them there as soon after his return as
possible.

Madge looked wistfully at the mountains, as with shadowy grandeur they loomed in the distance.
There is ever a solemnity about mountain scenery, and she felt it as she passed under the lofty
brows of wooded heights. To her spirit it was grateful and appropriate, for, while she would
lead among them apparently the existence of a young girl bent only on enjoyment, she believed
she would leave them, either a happy woman, or else facing the tragedy of a thwarted life.
Their deepest shadows might, even when her laugh was gayest, typify the despondency she would
hide from all.

It was Saturday, and Mr. Muir accompanied his family. He and his wife looked worn and weary,
for at this time circumstances were bringing an excess of care to both. Mrs. Muir was a devoted
mother, and little Jack had taxed her patience and strength to the utmost. A defensive warfare
is ever the severest test of manhood, and Mr. Muir had found the past week a trying one. He
had been lured into an enterprise that at the time had seemed certain of success, even to his
conservative mind, but unforeseen elements had entered into the problem, and it now required
all his nerve, all his resources, to meet the strain. Neither Madge nor his wife knew anything
of this. Indeed, it was not his habit to speak of his affairs to any one, unless the exigencies
of the case required explanation. In this emergency he was obliged to maintain among his associates
an air of absolute confidence. Now that he was out of the arena he gave evidence of the strain.

Madge saw this, and resolved that her large reserve of vitality should be drawn upon. The tired
mother should be relieved and the perplexed and wearied man beguiled into forgetfulness of
the sources of anxiety. Jack would have indulged in a perpetual howl during the journey had
not his attention been diverted by Madge's unexpected expedients, which often suspended an
outcry with comical abruptness, while her remarks and questions made it impossible for Mr.
Muir to toil on mentally in Wall Street. By reason of the heat the majority of the passengers
dozed or fretted. She heroically kept up the spirits of her little band, oblivious of the admiring
eyes that often turned toward her flushed, animated face.

There are few stronger tests than unflagging good-humor during a disagreeable journey with
cross children. At last the ordeal came to an end, and in the late afternoon shadows they alighted
at the wide piazza of the Under-Cliff House, and were shown to airy rooms, which proved that
the guests were not kept in pigeon-holes for the sole benefit of the proprietor. Our heroine
employed the best magic the world has known--thoughtful helpfulness. Mr. Muir was banished.
"You would be as useful as a whale," she said to him, when he offered to aid his wife in unpacking
and getting settled. "Go down to the piazza and smoke in peace. I shall be worth a dozen of
you as soon as I take off my travelling-dress."

She verified her words, and before they were aware of it Mrs. Muir, who was prone to fall into
hopeless confusion at such times, and the nurse were acting under her direction. The elder
little boy and girl were coaxed, restrained, managed, and soon sent down to their father, redressed
and serene. Jack was lulled to sleep in Madge's room. The trunks instead of disgorging chaos,
were compelled to part with their contents in an orderly way. In little more than an hour the
two rooms allotted to Mr. and Mrs. Muir, and the nurse with the children, took on a cosey,
inhabitable aspect, and by supper-time the ladies, in evening costume and with unruffled brows,
joined Mr. Muir.

"The idea of my ever permitting Madge to go back to Santa Barbara!" exclaimed Mrs. Muir. "This
day alone has proved that I can never get on without her. Just go and look at your room, sir.
One would think we had been settled here a week. You ought to pay Madge's bills, and give her
a handsome surplus."

"If time is money," said Madge, "Henry will have to pay me well. He must stay and help me explore
these mountains in every direction. But now let us eat, drink, and be merry, for to-morrow
we shall go to church."

"I've half a mind to take you down to Wall Street with me next week," said Mr. Muir. "Perhaps
you can straighten out things there."

"No, sir. I'm a woman's-rights girl, and one of her rights is to get things out of the way
as soon as possible, so that people can have a good time. Thank heaven our affairs can be shut
up in drawers and hung up in closets, and there we can leave them--in this case for a good
supper first, and a long quiet rest on this piazza afterward. Don't you think you could find
a drawer somewhere in which to tuck away your Wall Street matters, Henry? You won't need them
till some time next week, for you must certainly spend two or three days with us."

Mr. Muir laughed. "I've heard of managing women before, but you beat them all. You have won,
to-day, the right to manage for a while. I'll join you soon; then supper; and, as you suggest,
I'll put the Wall Street matters somewhere and lock them up."

Thus their mountain sojourn began auspiciously. The supper was excellent, and they were in
a mood to enjoy it; they found the piazza deliciously cool after the long hot day; and the
faint initial pipings of autumn insects only emphasized the peace and quiet of the evening.
The mountains brooded around them like great shadows, their outlines gemmed with stars, and
the very genius of repose seemed to settle down upon the weary man and woman who were in the
thick of their life's battle.

They were among the earliest arrivals at the house, and had a wide space to themselves. Indeed,
they could have been scarcely more secluded at their own summer residence. For those seeking
rest, an early flight to summer resorts brings a rich reward.

While her relatives dozed or merely revived sufficiently from time to time to make some desultory
remark, Madge thought deeply. At first she had been disappointed at the postponement of Graydon's
return, but she grew reconciled as she dwelt upon it. While hope was deferred, she enjoyed
a longer lease of anticipation. When he did come she might soon learn that all hope was vain.
Besides, the delay gave her time to familiarize herself with the region and its most beautiful
walks and drives. The mountains, woods, and rocks should all be pressed into her service. They
would not reveal her secret, and they might engender thoughts and words with which Miss Wildmere
would be out of harmony.

"I've been thinking," Mr. Muir at last remarked.

"Nonsense! you've been asleep," Madge replied.

"No; I've thought profoundly."

"Not even a penny for any thoughts of yours since supper."

"They would be worth fortunes, life, health, happiness, to half the world."

"Then keep still till you have a patent, copyright, or something," said his wife.

"No. I rise simply to remark--also to retire--that a little oil keeps machinery from wearing
out and going to pieces. Come now, old lady" (pulling his wife to her feet), "you are the better
to-night, as I am, for the oil that Madge has slipped in here and there. I fear the machinery
to-day would have run badly without it."

The group that gathered at the breakfast-table next morning bore early testimony to the tonic
of the hills. Jack only was not so well, and Mrs. Muir remained with him, while Madge and Mr.
Muir wended their way to a little chapel whose spire was the only summons to worship. A short,
genial, middle-aged man met them at the door, with such hospitable cordiality as to suggest
that he was receiving friends at his own home, and conducted them to seats. A venerable clergyman
sat in the pulpit with a face full of quiet benignity. Every one who came appeared to receive
an almost personal welcome; and Madge and Mr. Muir looked enviously at the self-appointed usher.
It was as evident that he was not a professional sexton as that the little congregation could
not afford such a luxury. No care clouded his brow. Evidently his future did not depend on
fluctuations in the maelstrom of commerce, nor had he one hope so predominant over all others
that his life was one of masked suspense, as was the case with poor Madge. He was rather like
the rugged, sun-lighted mountains near, solid, stable, simple. No matter what happened, he
would remain and appear much the same.

Such was the tenor of Madge's thoughts as she waited for the opening of service. Fanciful and
imaginative to a great degree, she found a certain mental enjoyment in observing the impressions
made upon her by strangers.

The service was brief and simple; the good old clergyman preached the gospel of hope, and his
words calmed and strengthened the young girl's mind. She was made to feel that there is something
more and better than present happiness--that there are remedies for earthly ills.

When she returned to the hotel she found that Mrs. Muir was worried about Jack, who was worse,
and that a Dr. Sommers had been sent for. She could not help smiling when, a little later,
the hospitable usher of the chapel came briskly in. She eventually learned that the doctor
provoked smiles wherever he went, as a breeze raises ripples on the surface of a stream. He
smiled himself when he met people, and every one took the contagion. He examined the baby,
said the case would require a little watching until certain teeth came through, and then that
there would be no further trouble. He spoke with the same confidence with which he would announce
that July was near.

"You watch the case, then," said Mr. Muir, decisively. "I must be in town. If you can look
after the child and save my wife from worry, my mind will be easy as regards this end of the
line at least."

"All right, sir. We'll manage it. Healthy boy. No trouble."

"Have you lived long among the mountains, doctor?" Madge ventured to ask.

"I should think so. As long as I have lived. Was born and brought up among 'em."

"It must be dreary here in the winter," Mrs. Muir remarked.

"Not a bit of it. It's never dreary."

"How far among the hills does your practice extend?" Madge pursued.

"As far as I'll go, and I'm usually going."

"Perhaps you can give us, then, some advice as to drives and walks."

"Oh, lots, free gratis. I can tell Mr. Muir of a trout-stream or two, also."

"Doctor," said Madge, laughing, "I am very ill. I shall need much advice, and prescriptions
of all the romantic walks and drives in the vicinity."

"And like most of the advice from doctors, it won't be taken. A stroll on the piaza is about
all that most ladies are equal to. You look, however, as if you should not fear a steep path
or a rough road."

"You shall see," cried Madge.

"Yes, I will see," said the doctor, laughing, and bowing himself out. "I've seen a great many
ladies who could dance miles, but were as afraid of a mountain as of a bear."

At the dinner-table Mrs. Muir said, laughingly, "In Dr. Sommers, Madge has found a kindred
spirit--another oiler of machinery. If between him and Madge things don't go smoothly, the
fates are indeed against us."

"When life does go smoothly, it is because of just such good, cheery common-sense," Mr. Muir
remarked, sententiously. "I'm in the financial centre of this part of the world, and schemes
involving millions and the welfare of States--indeed of whole sections of the country--are
daily brought to my consideration, and I tell you again men are often in no condition to act
wisely or well because the wear and tear of their life is greater after business hours than
during them. Business maniac as Madge thinks me to be, little Jack is of more consequence than
a transcontinental railway. I must face the music--the discord, rather--of Wall Street to-morrow.
There is no use in protesting or coaxing; I must be there; but it's a great thing to be able
to return with my nerves soothed, rested, and quieted. Heaven help the men who, after the strain
of the day, must go home to be pricked half to death with pin-and-needle-like worries, if not
worse."

"Please imagine Madge and myself making a profound courtesy for the implied compliment," said
Mrs. Muir. "But can you not spend part of the week with us?"

"No. Graydon will soon be here, and there is much to be seen to. He writes that he has worked
very hard to get things in shape so that he can leave them, and that he wishes to take a vacation.
As far as possible I shall gratify him. He can be with you here, and come to town occasionally
as I need him. It's all turning out very well, and I am better off than many in these troublous
times."

The remainder of his stay passed quietly in absolute rest, and on the following morning he
was evidently strengthened for the renewal of the struggle.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Stella!"

Miss Wildmere remained absorbed in her novel.

"Stella!" repeated Mr. Wildmere, impatiently.

"What is it?" she asked, fretfully. "I'm in an exciting scene. Can't you wait awhile?"

"Oh, throw down your confounded novel! You should be giving your mind to real life and exciting
scenes of your own. No, I can't wait and don't propose to, for I must go out."

The words were spoken in a small but elegant house, furnished in an ultra-fashionable style.
Mr. Wildmere was a stout, florid man, who looked as if he might be burning his candle at both
ends. His daughter was dressed to receive summer evening calls at her own home, for she was
rarely without them. If the door-bell had rung she would have dismissed her exciting scene
without hesitation, but it was only her father who asked her attention.

"Very well," she said, absently, turning down a leaf.

Her father observed her listless air and averted face for a moment with contracted brow, then
quietly remarked, "Graydon Muir may return at any time now."

Her apathy disappeared at once, and a faint color stole into her face.

"Haven't you had enough of general attention and flirtation? I know that my wishes have little
weight; you have refused not a few good offers and one on which I had set my heart; but let
the past go. The immediate future may require careful and decisive action. I speak in view
of your own interests, and to such considerations I know you will not be indifferent. If you
were taking a natural and intelligent interest in my affairs you would have some comprehension
of my difficulties and dangers. The next few months will decide whether I can keep up or not.
In the meantime you have your opportunity. Graydon Muir will share in the fortunes of his brother,
who has had the reputation of being very wealthy and eminently conservative. I have learned,
however, that he has invested largely in one enterprise that now appears to be very dubious--how
largely no one but himself knows. If this affair goes through all right you couldn't do better
than develop Graydon Muir into an impatient suitor; and you had better keep him well in hand
for a time, anyway. He is a good business man and far more to be depended upon than rich young
fellows who have inherited wealth, with no ability except in spending it. If the Muirs pass
through these times they will become one of the strongest and safest houses in the country.
Remember that the if is to be considered. Mr. Arnault, too, is a member of a strong, wealthy
house. I would advise you to make your choice between these two men speedily. You are not adapted
to a life of poverty, and would not enjoy it. An alliance with either of these men might also
aid in sustaining me."

Miss Wildmere listened attentively, but made no comment, and her father evidently did not require
any, for he went out immediately. He understood his daughter sufficiently to believe that she
needed no further advice. He was right. The exciting crisis in her novel was forgotten, and
her fair face took on an expression that did not enhance its beauty. Calculation on the theme
uppermost in her mind produced a revery in which an artist would not have cared to paint her.
It was evident that the time had come when she must dispose of herself, and the question was,
how to do it to the best advantage.

To Graydon she gave her preference. He was remarkably fine looking, and could easily be a leader
in society if he so desired--"and certainly shall be," she thought, "if I take his name." As
far as her heart spoke in the matter it declared for him, also. Other men had wooed and pleaded,
but she had ever mentally compared them with Graydon, and they had appeared insignificant.
She had felt sure for a long time that he would eventually be at her feet, and she had never
decided to refuse him. Now she was ready to accept but for this ominous "if," which her father
had emphasized. She could not think of marrying him should he become a poor man.

She neither liked nor disliked Mr. Arnault. He was a man of the world, reported wealthy, established
in a large but not very conservative business. He had the name of being a little fast and speculative,
but she was accustomed to that style of man. He was an open suitor who would take no rebuff,
and had laughingly told her so. After his refusal, instead of going away in despondency or
in a half-tragic mood, he had good-naturedly declared his intentions, and spent the remainder
of the evening in such lively chat that she had been pleased and amused by his tactics. Since
that time he had made himself useful, was always ready to be an escort with a liberal purse,
and never annoyed her with sentiment. She understood him, and he was aware that she did. He
took his chances for the future, and was always on hand to avail himself of any mood or emergency
which he could turn to his advantage. In various unimportant ways he was of service to Mr.
Wildmere, but hoped more from the broker's embarrassments than from the girl's heart.

"I might do worse," muttered the beauty--"I might do worse. If it were not for Graydon Muir,
I'd decide the question at once."

The door-bell rang, and Graydon was announced. Even her experienced nerves had a glad tingle
of excitement, she was so genuinely pleased to see him. And well she might be, for he was a
man to light any woman's eyes with admiration. If something of his youth had passed, his face
had gained a rich compensation in the strong lines of manhood, and his manner a courtly dignity
from long contact with the best elements of life. One saw that he knew the world, but had not
been spoiled by it. That he had not become cynical was proved by his greeting of Miss Wildmere.
He was capable of hoping that her continued freedom, in spite of her remarkable beauty, might
be explained on the ground of a latent regard for him, which had kept her ready for his suit
after an absence so unexpectedly prolonged. Through a friend he had, from time to time, been
informed about her; and there was no ring on her hand to forbid his ardent glances.

Never before had she appeared so alluringly attractive. He was a thorough American, and had
not been fascinated by foreign types of beauty. In his fair countrywoman he believed that he
saw his ideal. Her beauty was remarkable for a fullness, a perfection of outline, combined
with a fairness and delicacy which suggested that she was not made of ordinary clay. Miss Wildmere
prided herself upon giving the impression that she was remote from all that was common or homely
in life. She cultivated the characteristic of daintiness. In her dress, gloves, jewelry, and
complexion she would be immaculate at any cost. Graydon's fastidious taste could never find
a flaw in her, as regarded externals, and she knew the immense advantage of pleasing his eye
with a delicacy that even approached fragility in its exquisite fairness, while at the same
time her elastic step in the dance or promenade proved that she had abundance of vitality.

Nothing could have been more auspicious than his coming to-night--the very first evening after
his arrival. It assured her of the place she still held in his thoughts; it gave her the chance
to renew, in the glad hours of his return, the impression she had made; and she saw in his
admiring eyes how favorable that impression was. She exulted that he found her so well prepared.
Her clinging summer costume revealed not a little of her beauty, and suggested more, while
she permitted her eyes to give a welcome more cordial even than her words.

He talked easily and vivaciously, complimented her openly, yet with sincerity, and rallied
her on the wonder of wonders that she was still Miss Wildmere.

"Not so great a marvel as that you return a bachelor. Why did you not marry a German princess
or some reduced English countess?"

"I was not driven to that necessity, since there were American queens at home. I am delighted
that you are still in town. What are your plans for the summer?"

"We have not fully decided as yet."

"Then go to the Catskills. Our ladies are there at the Under-Cliff House, and I am told that
it is a charming place."

"I will speak to mamma of it. She must come to some decision soon. Papa says that he will be
too busy to go out of town much."

"Why, then, the Catskills is just the place--accessible to the city, you know. That is the
reason we have chosen it. I propose to take something of a vacation, but find that I must go
back and forth a good deal, and so shall escape the bore of a long journey."

"You have given two good reasons for our going there. The place cannot be stupid, since we
may see you occasionally, and papa could come oftener."

"Persuade Mrs. Wildmere into the plan by all means, and promise me your first waltz after your
arrival;" and there was eagerness in his tone.

"Will you also promise me your first?"

"Yes, and last also, if you wish."

"Oh, no! I do not propose to be selfish; Miss Alden will have her claims."

"What, Sister Madge? She must have changed greatly if she will dance at all. She is an invalid,
you know."

"I hear she has returned vastly improved in health--indeed, that she is quite a beauty."

"I hope so," he said, cordially, "but fear that rumor has exaggerated. My brother said she
was better, and added but little more. Have you seen her?"

"No. I only heard, a short time since, that she had returned."

Madge had not gone into society, and had she met Miss Wildmere face to face she would not have
been recognized, so greatly was she changed from the pallid, troubled girl over whom the beauty
had enjoyed her petty triumph; but the report of Miss Alden's attractions had aroused in Miss
Wildmere's mind apprehensions of a possible rival.

Graydon's manner was completely reassuring. Whatever Miss Alden might have become, she evidently
had no place in his thoughts beyond that natural to their relations. No closer ties had been
formed by correspondence during his long absence.

Further tête-à-tête was interrupted by the appearance of Mr. Arnault. The young men were courteous
and even cordial to each other, but before half an hour had passed they recognized that they
were rivals. Graydon's lips grew firm, and his eyes sparkled with the spirit of one who had
not the faintest idea of yielding to another. Miss Wildmere was delighted. The game was in
her own hands. She could play these two men off against each other, and take her choice. Mr.
Arnault was made to feel that he was not de trop, and, as usual, he was nonchalant, serene,
and evidently meant to stay. Therefore Graydon took his leave, and was permitted to carry away
the impression that his departure was regretted.

"Mr. Arnault," said Miss Wildmere, quietly, "we have decided to spend some time at the Under-Cliff
House in the Catskills. So you perceive that I shall be deprived of the pleasure of your calls
for a while."

"Not at all. I shall take part of my summering there also. When do you go?"

"In a few days--sometime before the fourth. How fortunately it all happens!" she added, laughing.
"When did you decide on the Catskills?"

"That's immaterial. When did you?"

"That also is immaterial. Perhaps you would like to ask mamma?"

"I'd rather ask papa--both, I should say," he replied, with a significant shrug.

"Do so by all means. Meanwhile I would suggest that a great many people go to the Catskills--thirty
thousand, more or less, it is said."

"I had another question in mind. Is Graydon Muir going there in order to follow the crowd?"

"If he is going I suppose he will follow his inclinations."

"Or you?"

"Were that possible, I could not prevent it. Indeed, women rarely resent such things."

"No indeed. It is well you do not, for you would become the embodiment of resentment. How large
is your train now, Stella?"

"You can dimmish it by one if you choose," she replied, smiling archly.

"I should be little missed, no doubt."

"I didn't say that."

"I'm more afraid of Muir than of all the train together."

"That's natural. The train has little chance collectively."

"Don't pretend to misunderstand me. There was unmistakable meaning in Muir's eyes."

"I should hope so. He means to help me have a good time. So do you, I trust."

"Certainly. You may judge of the future from the past," he added, significantly, as he rose
to take his leave.

"Then the future promises well for me," she said, giving him her hand cordially; "for you have
been one of the best of friends."

"And a good deal more. Good-night."

"Mamma," said Miss Wildmere, stopping at the nursery on her way to her room, "we must get ready
to go to the Catskills at once."

"Why, Stella! This is the first I've heard of this plan. Your father has said that he doesn't
see how we can go out of town at all this summer."

"Nonsense! I'll insure that papa agrees."

"I don't see how I can get ready soon. The baby is fretful, and I'm all worn out between broken
rest and worry. Won't you take Effie for a little while?"

"Where's the nurse?"

"She's out. Of course she has to have some time to herself."

"You just spoil the servants. It's her business to take care of the child. What else is she
paid for? Why can't one of the other maids take her?"

"Effie is too nervous to go to strangers to-night."

"Oh, well, give her to me, then."

The sensitive little organization knew at once that it was in the hands not only of a comparative
stranger, but also of one whose touch revealed little sympathy, and its protest was so great
that the tired mother took it again, while the beautiful daughter, the cynosure of all eyes
in public, went to her room to finish the "exciting scene" at her leisure.

But the scene had grown unreal. Its hero was but a shadow, and a distorted one at that. The
book fell from her hand; she again saw Graydon Muir coming forward to greet her with an easy
grace which no prince in story could surpass, and with an expression in his dark blue eyes
which no woman fails to understand. It assured her that neither in the old world nor in the
new had he seen her equal.

"I wish it could be," she murmured; "I hope it can be; were it not for that 'if' it should
be soon."

Thus, after her own fashion, another girl had designs upon Graydon.

CHAPTER IX

THE MEETING

Graydon had completed his final transactions abroad with more expedition than he had anticipated,
and, having been favored by a quick passage, had arrived several days sooner than he was expected.
Therefore he decided to accompany his brother to the Catskills on Saturday, spending the intervening
time in business and such arrangements as would leave him free to remain in the country for
a week or two. The second evening after his arrival again found him in Miss Wildmere's parlor,
and before he left he was given to understand that Mrs. Wildmere had decided upon the Under-Cliff
House also, and that they would depart on Saturday.

"Then you will be compagnon de voyage," said Graydon, with undisguised pleasure.

Somewhat to Mrs. Wildmere's surprise, her husband quietly acquiesced in his daughter's wishes,
telegraphed for rooms, and desired his wife to be ready.

She was a quiet, meek little woman, whose life had somehow become entangled in a sphere which
was not in harmony with her nature. Her beauty had faded early, and she had little force of
character with which to maintain her influence over her husband. His life was amid the fierce
excitements of Wall Street; hers, as far as she had a life, was a weary effort to keep up appearances
and meet the expenses of a fashionable daughter, on an uncertain and greatly fluctuating income.

Mr. Wildmere informed her that his affairs would keep him in town until late in the following
week, but that, as the house to which she was going was a quiet family hotel, she would have
no trouble.

Mr. Muir had telegraphed the arrival of his brother, and the latter had written a few cordial
but hasty lines to both his sister-in-law and Madge. Where he spent his evenings was unknown
to Mr. Muir, but that gentleman had little trouble in guessing when he saw his brother greet
the Wildmeres as if he understood their plans, and laughingly promise Mr. Wildmere that he
would see the ladies and their belongings safely established in the Under-Cliff House. Graydon
observed the slight cloud on his brother's face, but ignored it, feeling that his preference
was an affair of his own. He believed that the long-wished-for opportunity to press his suit
with vigor had come, and had no hesitation as to his purpose. He did not intend to act precipitately,
however. He would first learn just how Mr. Arnault stood, and become reasonably assured by
Miss Wildmere's manner toward himself that her preference was not a hope, but a reality.

The enterprise in which Mr. Muir had engaged, and which now so taxed his financial strength,
was outside of his regular business, and Graydon knew nothing of it. The young man believed
that his own means and exceptionally good prospects were sufficient to warrant the step he
proposed to take. He assuredly had the right to please himself in his choice, and he felt that
he would be fortunate indeed could he win one whom so many had sought in vain.

It never entered Mr. Muir's mind to interpose any authority or undue influence. He merely felt
in regard to the matter a repugnance natural to one so alien in disposition to Mr. Wildmere
and his daughter, and it was a source of bitter mortification to him that he now found himself
in a position not unlike that of the broker, in what would appear, in the present aspect of
affairs, to be an outside speculation. During the ride to the mountains he mentally compared
Miss Wildmere's behavior with that of Madge a week before. Witnessing Graydon's evident infatuation,
he would have been glad to recognize any manifestation of traits that promised well for his
future; but the young lady was evidently altogether occupied with the attentions she received,
her own beauty, and the furtive admiration of fellow-passengers. Poor Mrs. Wildmere and the
nurse were left to manage the cross baby as best they could. Graydon once or twice tried to
do something, but his strange face and voice only frightened the child.

To Madge it had seemed an age since the telegram announcing Graydon's arrival had thrilled
every nerve with hope and fear. Then had come his hasty note, proving conclusively his affectionate
indifference. She was simply Madge to him, as of old. He was the one man of all the world to
her, and no calculating "if" would be the source of her restraint.

True to her old tactics, however, she had spent no time in idle dreaming. She had cultivated
Dr. Sommers's acquaintance, and he had already accompanied her and her sister through a wild
valley, on the occasion of a visit to one of his patients. Little Jack had improved under his
care, and Mrs. Muir was growing serene, rested, and eager for Saturday. Madge shared her impatience,
and yet dreaded the hour during which she felt that a glimpse of the future would be revealed.
She had driven out daily with her sister, and familiarized herself with the topography of the
region. Having formed the acquaintance of some pleasant and comparatively active people in
the house, she had joined such walking expeditions as they would venture upon. In rowing the
children upon a small lake she also disposed of some of her superabundant vitality and the
nervous excitement which anticipation could not fail to produce. In the evening there was more
or less dancing, and her hand was eagerly sought by such of the young men as could obtain the
right to ask it. Mrs. Muir's remark that she would become a belle in spite of herself proved
true; but while she affected no exclusive or distant airs, the most callow and forward youth
felt at once the restraint of her fine reserve. Her sensitive nature enabled her, in a place
of public resort, to know instinctively whom to keep at a distance, and who, like Dr. Sommers,
not only invited but justified a frank and friendly manner.

As the time for the gentlemen to arrive approached, Mrs. Muir showed more restless interest
than Madge. The one anticipated a bit of amusement over Graydon's surprise; the other looked
forward to meeting her fate. Mrs. Muir was garrulous; Madge was comparatively silent, and maintained
the semblance of interest in a book so naturally that her sister exclaimed, "I expect you will
die with a book in your hand! I could no more read now than preach a sermon. Come, it's time
to make your toilet. Let me help you, and I want you to get yourself up 'perfectly regardless.'
You must outshine them all at the hop this evening."

"Nonsense, Mary! They won't be here for an hour and a half. I'm going to lie down;" and she
went to her room. When her sister sought admittance half an hour later the door was locked
and all was quiet. At last, in her impatience, she knocked and cried, "Wake up. They will be
here soon."

"I'm not asleep, and it will not take me long to dress."

"Well, you are the coolest young woman I ever knew," Mrs. Muir called out, finding that admittance
was denied her.

Madge had determined to spend the final hour of her long separation alone. Her nature had become
too deep and strong to seek trivial diversion from the suspense that weighed upon her spirit.
As she thought of the possibility of failure, and its results, her courage faltered a little,
and a few tears would come. At last, with a glance heavenward which proved that there was nothing
in her heart to keep her from looking thither for sanction, she left her room, serene and resolute.
She had taken her woman's destiny into her own hand, to mold it in her own way, but in no arrogant
and unbelieving spirit.

Mrs. Muir uttered a disappointed protest. "Oh, Madge, how plainly you are dressed!"

"I knew you wouldn't like it at first," was the quiet reply. By the time they had reached the
parlor door opposite the office, near which they proposed to wait for the travellers, now momentarily
expected, Mrs. Muir was compelled to acknowledge the correctness of Madge's taste. Her costume
no more distracted attention from herself than would the infolding calyx of a rosebud. In its
exquisite proportions her fine figure was outlined by close white drapery, which made her appear
taller than she really was. A single half-open Jacqueminot rose, like the one she had sent
to Graydon at their parting over two years since, was fastened on her bosom. Her dark eyes
burned with a suppressed excitement. Her complexion, if not so white as that of Miss Wildmere,
was pure, and had a richer hue of health. But she was pale now. Her red lips half destroyed
their exquisite curves in firm compression. The moment had not quite come for action, when
those lips must be true to herself, true to her purpose, even while they spoke words which
might be misleading to others.

Mrs. Muir, with triumph, saw the glances of strong admiration turned toward her sister from
every side. Madge saw them also, but only to read in them the verdict she hoped to obtain from
the kind blue eyes for whose coming she waited.

Standing with Mrs. Muir, facing the long hall down which Graydon must advance, she knew she
would see him before he could recognize her. How much of longing, of breathless interest, would
be concentrated in those moments of waiting, she herself had never imagined till they were passing.

The stages began to arrive, with consequent bustle, and the hasty advance toward the office
of men seeking to register their names early, in order to secure a choice of rooms. At last
she saw Graydon's tall form and laughing face, and for a second something approaching to faintness
caused her to close her eyes. When she opened them again they rested upon Miss Wildmere.

This young lady understood the art of making an impressive and almost triumphal entry on new
scenes. Therefore she had been in no haste. Indeed, haste had no place among her attributes:
it was ungraceful and usually not effective. When, therefore, the crowd had passed on, and
there was a comparatively clear space in the hall, she advanced down it at Graydon's side as
if her mind was wholly engrossed with their lively chat. Never for a second was she unconscious
of the attention they attracted. Graydon was one at whom even men would turn and look as he
passed, and she believed that there was none other who could keep step with him like herself.
So thought the self-appointed committee of reception who always regard curiously the new-comers
at a summer resort, and there were whispered notes of admiration as the two paused for a moment
before the register and looked back. Then it was seen that a meek-looking little lady and a
nurse and child were straggling after them, while Mr. Muir brought up the rear. Graydon had
some light wraps thrown gracefully over his arm, but the merchant carried the less ornamental
impedimenta of the party, for the earlier guests had already overladened the office-boys. He
now handed the valise--a sort of tender upon the baby--to a porter, and rather grimly acknowledged
Mrs. Wildmere's mingled thanks and feeble protestations.

"Please register for us," said Miss Wildmere, glancing carelessly yet observantly around. An
intervening group had partially hidden Madge and her sister. It was also evident that Graydon
was too much occupied with his fair companion to look far away. He complied, thinking, meantime,
"Some day I may register for her again, and then my name will suffice for us both." The smile
which followed the thought brought out the best lines of his handsome profile to poor Madge,
who permitted no phase of expression on that face to escape her scrutiny. So true was the clairvoyance
of her intense interest that she guessed the thought which was so agreeable to him, and she
grew paler still.

Mr. Muir hastened to greet his wife, and then Graydon recognized her. He came at once and kissed
her in his accustomed hearty way. Madge stood near, unnoted, unrecognized.

"Where's Madge? Isn't she well enough to come down?" he asked, his eyes following Miss Wildmere,
who had entered the parlor, which she must cross to reach her room beyond. Mrs. Muir began
to laugh immoderately, and Mr. Muir followed his brother's eyes with vexation. Graydon was
on the qui vive instantly, and Madge drew a step nearer and began to smile. For once the punctilious
and elegant Graydon forgot his courtesy, and looked at Madge in utter astonishment--an expression,
however, which passed swiftly into admiration and delight.

"Madge!" he exclaimed, seizing both her hands. "I couldn't have believed it. I wouldn't believe
it now but for your eyes;" and before she could prevent him he had placed a kiss upon her lips.

Miss Wildmere had seen the unknown beauty as she passed, had inventoried her with woman's instantaneous
perception, had paused on the distant threshold and seen the greeting, then had vanished with
a vindictive flash in her gray eyes.

Graydon's impetuous words and salute had produced smiles and envious glances, and the family
party withdrew into a retired corner of the apartment, Madge's cheeks, meanwhile, vying, in
spite of herself, with the rose on her breast. Graydon would not relinquish her hand, and,
as Mrs. Muir had predicted, indulged in little more than exclamation points.

"There now, be rational," cried the young girl, laughing, her heart for the moment full of
gladness and triumph. He was indeed bending upon her looks of admiration, delight, and affection.

"Why have I been kept in the dark about all this?" he at last asked, incoherently.

"For the same reason that we were. Madge meant to give us a surprise, and succeeded. I couldn't
get over it, and they were always laughing at me, so I determined that I should have my laugh
at you. Oh, wasn't it rich? To think of the elegant and travelled society man standing there
staring with his eyes and mouth wide open!"

"I don't think it was quite so bad as that, but if it was there's good reason for it. Tell
me, Madge, how this miracle was wrought!"

"There, that's just what I called it," cried Mrs. Muir, "and it's nothing less than one, in
spite of all that Madge and Henry can say."

"When you are ready for supper I will show you one phase of the miracle," said Madge, laughing,
with glad music in her voice. "Come, I'm not an escaped member of a menagerie, and there's
no occasion for you to stare any longer."

"Yes, come along," added Mr. Muir; "I've had no roast beef to-day and a surfeit of sentiment."

The young fellow colored slightly, but said brusquely: "Men's tastes change with age. I suppose
you did not find a little sentiment amiss once upon a time. Well, Madge, you are not a bit
of a ghost now, yet I fear you are an illusion."

"Illusions will vanish when you come to help me at supper. We will wait for you on the piazza."

As she paced its wide extent, her illusions also vanished. Graydon had greeted, her as a brother,
and a brother only. When the tumult at her heart subsided, this truth stood out most clearly.
His kiss still tingled upon her lips. It must be the last, unless followed by a kiss of love.
Their brotherly and sisterly relations must be shattered at once. No such relations existed
for her, and only as she destroyed such regard on his part could a tenderer affection take
its place. With her as his sister he would be content; he might not readily think of her in
another light, and meantime might drift swiftly into an engagement with Miss Wildmere.

CHAPTER X

OLD TIES BROKEN

"Madge," said Graydon, rejoining her on the piazza, and giving her his arm, while Mrs. Muir
sat down to wait for her husband, "you wear a rose like the one you sent me when we parted
so long ago. Oh, but my heart was heavy then! Did you make this choice to-night by chance?"

"You have a good memory."

"You have not answered me."

"I shall admit nothing that will increase your vanity."

"You will now of necessity make my pride overweening."

"How is that? I hope to have a better influence over you."

"As I look at you I regard my pride as most pardonable and natural. My old thoughts and hopes
are realized beyond even imagination, although, looking at your eyes, in old times, I always
had a high ideal of your capabilities. I should be a clod indeed if I were not proud of such
a sister to champion in society."

Madge's hearty laugh was a little forced as she said, "You have a delightfully cool way of
taking things for granted. I'm no longer a little sick girl, but, to vary Peggotty's exultant
statement, a young lady 'growed.' You forgot yourself, sir, in your greeting; but that was
pardonable in your paroxysm of surprise.

"What, Madge! Will you not permit me to be your brother?"

"What an absurd question!" she answered, still laughing. "You are not my brother. Can I permit
water to run up hill? You were like a brother, though, when I was a sick child in the queer
old times--kinder than most brothers, I think. But, Graydon, I am grown up. See, my head comes
above your shoulder."

"Well, you are changed."

"For the better, in some respects, I hope you will find."

"I don't at all like the change you suggest in our relations, and am not sure I will submit
to it. It seems absurd to me."

"It will not seem so when you come to think of it," she replied, gravely and gently. "You think
of me still as little Madge; I am no longer little Madge, even to myself. A woman's instincts
are usually right, Graydon."

"Oh, thank you! I am glad I am still 'Graydon.' Why do you not call me 'Mr. Muir?'"

"Because I am perfectly rational. Because I regard you as almost the best friend I have."

"Break up that confabulation," cried Mr. Muir to the young people, who had paused and were
confronting each other at the further end of the piazza. "If you think Madge can explain herself
in a moment or a week you are mistaken. Come to supper."

"My brother is right--you are indeed an enigma," he said, discontentedly.

"An enigma, am I?" she responded, smiling. "Please remember that most of the world's enigmas
were slowly found out because so simple."

As they passed from the dusky piazza to the large, brilliantly lighted supper-room, with nearly
all its tables occupied, he was curious to observe how she would meet the many critical eyes
turned toward her. Again he was puzzled as well as surprised. She walked at his side as though
the room were empty. There was no affectation of indifference, no trace of embarrassed or of
pleased self-consciousness. From the friendly glances and smiles that she received it was also
apparent that she had already made acquaintances. She moved with the easy, graceful step of
perfect good breeding and assured confidence, and was as self-possessed as himself. Was this
the little ghost who had once been afraid of her own shadow, which was scarcely less substantial
than herself?

They had been seated but a moment when Miss Wildmere entered alone. To Graydon this appeared
pathetic. He did not know that her mother was so worn out from the journey, and so embarrassed
by unaided efforts to get settled while still caring for her half-sick child, that she had
decided to make a slight and hasty repast in her own room. Miss Wildmere cared little for what
took place behind the scenes, but was usually superb before the footlights. Nothing could have
been more charming or better calculated to win general good-will than her advance down the
long room. In external beauty she was more striking at first than Madge. She did not in the
least regret that she must enter alone, for she was not proud of her mother, and nothing drew
attention from herself. She assumed, however, a slight and charming trace of embarrassment
and perplexity, which to Graydon was perfectly irresistible, and he mentally resolved that
she should not much longer want a devoted escort. Madge saw his glance of sympathy and strong
admiration, his smile and low bow as she passed, ushered forward by the obsequious headwaiter,
and her heart sank. In spite of all she had attempted and achieved, the old cynical assurance
came back to her--"You are nothing to Graydon, and never can be anything to him." She was pale
enough now, but her eyes burned with the resolution not to yield until all hope was slain.
She talked freely, and was most friendly toward Graydon, but there was a slight constraint
in his manner. The beautiful and self-possessed girl who sat opposite him was not little Madge
whom it had been his pleasure to pet and humor. She evidently no longer regarded herself as
his sister, but rather as a charming young woman abundantly able to take care of herself. She
had indeed changed marvellously in more respects than one, and he felt aggrieved that he had
been kept in ignorance of her progress. He believed that she had grown away from him and the
past, as well as grown up, according to her declaration. He recalled her apparent disinclination
for correspondence, and now thought it due to indifference, rather than an indolent shrinking
from effort. The surprise she had given him seemed a little thing--an act due possibly to vanity--compared
with the sisterly accounts she might have written of her improvement. She had achieved the
wonder without aid from him, and so of course had not felt the need of his help in any way.
In remembrance of the past he felt that he had not deserved to be so ignored. Her profession
of friendship was all well enough--there could scarcely be less than that--but the Madge he
had looked forward to meeting again as of old no longer existed. Oh, yes, she should have admiration
and exclamation points to her heart's content, but he had come from his long exile hungry for
something more and better than young lady friends. He had long since had a surfeit of these
semi-Platonic affinities. The girl who apparently had been refusing scores of men for his sake
was more to his taste. His brother's repugnance only irritated and incited him, and he thought,
"I'll carry out his business policy to the utmost, but away from the office I am my own man."

As these thoughts passed through his mind, they began to impart to his manner a tinge of gallantry,
the beginning of a departure from his old fraternal and affectionate ways. He was too well-bred
to show pique openly, or to reveal a sense of injury during the first hours of reunion, but
he already felt absolved from being very attentive to a girl who not only had proved so conclusively
that she could manage admirably for herself, but who also had been so indifferent that she
had not needed his sympathy in her efforts or thought it worth while to gladden him with a
knowledge of her progress. He had loved her as a sister, and had given ample proof of this.
He had maintained his affection for the Madge that he remembered. "But I have been told," he
thought, bitterly, "that the young lady before me is a 'friend.' She has been a rather distant
friend, if the logic of events counts for anything. Not satisfied with the thousands of miles
that separated us, she has also withheld her confidence in regard to changes that would have
interested even a casual acquaintance."

Madge soon detected the changing expression of his eyes, the lessening of simple, loving truth
in his words, and while she was pained she feared that all this and more would necessarily
result from the breaking up of their old relations. Her task was a difficult one at best--perhaps
it was impossible--nor had she set about it in calculating policy. Their old relations could
not be maintained on her part. Even the touch of his hand had the mysterious power to send
a thrill to her very heart. Therefore she must surround herself at once with the viewless yet
impassable barriers which a woman can interpose even by a glance.

As they rose, Graydon remarked, "I have helped you at supper, and yet one of my illusions has
not vanished. The air at Santa Barbara must have been very nourishing if your appetite was
no better there than here. Your strange 'sea-change' on that distant coast is still marvellous
to me."

"Mary can tell you how ravenous I usually am. I do not meet friends every day from whom I have
been separated so long."

"It is a very ordinary thing for me to meet 'friends,'" he replied, sotto voce, "for I have
many. I had hopes that I should meet one who would be far more than a friend. I'm half inclined
to go out to Santa Barbara and see if my little sister Madge is not still there."

"Do you think me a fraud?"

"Oh, no, only so changed that I scarcely know how to get acquainted with you."

"Even if I granted so much, which I do not, I might suggest that one must be uninteresting
indeed if she inspires no desire for acquaintance. But such talk is absurd between us, Graydon."

"Of course it is. You are so changed for the better that I can scarcely believe my eyes or
ears, and my heart not at all. Of course your wishes shall be my law, and my wishes will lead
me to seek your acquaintance with deep and undisguised interest. You see the trouble with me
is that I have not changed, and it will require a little time for me to adapt myself to the
new order of things. I am now somewhat stunned and paralyzed. In this imbecile state I am both
stupid and selfish. I ought to congratulate you, and so I do with all the shattered forces
of my mind and reason. You have improved amazingly. You are destined to become a belle par
excellence, and probably are one now--I know so little of what has occurred since we parted."

"You are changed also, Graydon. You used to be kind in the old days;" and she spoke sadly.

"In some respects I am changed," he said, earnestly; "and my affection for you is of such long
standing and so deep that it prompts me to make another protest." (They had strolled out upon
the grounds and were now alone.) "I have changed in this respect; I am no longer so young as
I was, and am losing my zest for general society. I was weary of residence abroad, where I
could have scarcely the semblance of a home, and, while I had many acquaintances and friends,
I had no kindred. I'm sorry to say that the word 'friend,' in its reference to young ladies,
does not mean very much to me; or, rather, I have learned from experience just what it does
mean. A few years since I was proud of my host of young lady friends, and some I thought would
continue to be such through life. Bah! They are nearly all married or engaged; their lives
have drifted completely away from mine, as it was natural and inevitable that they should.
We are good friends still, but what does it amount to? I rarely think of them; they never of
me, I imagine. We exert no influence on each other's lives, and add nothing to them. I never
had a sister, but I had learned to love you as if you were one, and when I heard that you were
to be of our family again, the resumption of our old relations was one of my dearest expectations.
It hurt me cruelly, Madge, when you laughed at the idea as preposterous, and told me that I
had forgotten myself when following the most natural impulse of my heart. It seemed to me the
result of prudishness, rather than womanly delicacy, unless you have changed in heart as greatly
as in externals. You could be so much to me as a sister. It is a relationship that I have always
craved--a sister not far removed from me in age; and such a tie, it appears to me, might form
the basis of a sympathy and confidence that would be as frank as unselfish and helpful. That
is what I looked forward to in you, Madge. Why on earth can it not be?"

She was painfully embarrassed, and was glad that his words were spoken under the cover of night.
She trembled, for his question probed deep. How could she explain that what was so natural
for him was impossible for her? He mistook her hesitation for a sign of acquiescence, and continued:
"Wherein have I failed to act like a brother? During the years we were together was I not reasonably
kind and considerate? You did not think of yourself then as one of my young lady friends. Why
should you now? I have not changed, and, as I have said, I have returned hungry for kindred
and the quieter pleasures of home. It is time that I was considering the more serious questions
of life, and of course the supreme question with a man of my years is that of a home of his
own. I have never been able to think of such a home and not associate you with it. I can invite
my sister to it and make her a part of it, but I cannot invite young lady friends. A sister
can be such a help to a fellow; and it seems to me that I could be of no little aid to you.
I know the world and the men you will meet in society. Unless you seclude yourself, you will
be as great a belle as Miss Wildmere. You also have a fine property of your own. Will it be
nothing to have a brother at your side to whom you can speak frankly of those who seek your
favor? Come, Madge, be simple and rational. I have not changed; my frank words and pleadings
prove that I have not. If we do not go back to the hotel brother and sister it will be because
you have changed;" and he attempted to put his arm around her and draw her to him.

She sprang aloof. "Well, then, I have changed," she said, in a low, concentrated voice. "Think
me a prude if you will. I know I am not. You are unjust to me, for you give me, in effect,
no alternative. You say, 'Think of me as a brother; feel and act as if you were my sister,'
when I am not your sister. It's like declaring that there is nothing in blood--that such relations
are questions of choice and will. I said in downright sincerity that I regarded you as almost
the best friend I had, and I have not so many friends that the word means nothing to me. I
do remember all your kindness in the past--when have I forgotten it for an hour?--but that
does not change the essential instincts of my womanhood, and since we parted I've grown to
womanhood. You in one sense have not changed, and I still am in your mind the invalid child
you used to indulge and fondle. It is not just to me now to ask that I act and feel as if there
were a natural tie between us. The fact ever remains that there is not. Why should I deceive
you by pretending to what is impossible? Nature is stronger than even your wishes, Graydon,
and cannot be ignored."

She spoke hesitatingly, feeling her way across most difficult and dangerous ground, but her
decision was unmistakable, and he said, quietly, "I am answered. See, we have wandered far
from the house. Had we not better return?"

After a few moments of silence she asked, "Are you so rich in friends that you have no place
for me?"

"Why, certainly, Madge," he replied, in cordial, offhand tones, "we are friends. There's nothing
else for us to be. I don't pretend to understand your scruples. Even if a woman refused to
be my wife I should be none the less friendly, unless she had trifled with me. To my man's
reason a natural tie does not count for so much as the years we spent together. I remember
what you were to me then, and what I seemed to you. I tried to keep up the old feeling by correspondence.
The West is a world of wonders, and you have come from it the greatest wonder of all."

"I hope I shall not prove to you a monstrosity, Graydon. I will try not to be one if you will
give me a chance."

"Oh, no, indeed; you promise to be one of the most charming young ladies I ever met."

"I don't promise anything of the kind," she replied, with a laugh that was chiefly the expression
of her intense nervous tension. It jarred upon his feelings, and confirmed him in the belief
that their long separation had broken up their old relations completely, and that she, in the
new career which her beauty opened before her, wished for no embarrassing relations of any kind.

"Well," he said, with an answering laugh, "I suppose I must take you for what you are and propose
to be--that is, if I ever find out."

In a few moments more, after some light badinage, he left her with Mr. and Mrs. Muir on the
piazza, and went to claim his waltz with Miss Wildmere.

CHAPTER XI

"I FEAR I SHALL FAIL"

The band had been discoursing lively strains for some time, and Miss Wildmere had at last dragged
her mother down for a chaperon--the only available one as yet. The anxious mother was eager
to return to her fretting child, and her daughter was much inclined to resent Graydon's prolonged
absence. "If it were politic, and I had other acquaintances, I would punish him," she thought.
It was a new experience for her to sit in a corner of the parlor, apparently neglected, while
others were dancing. There were plenty who looked wistfully toward her; but there was no one
to introduce her, and Graydon's absence left the ice unbroken.

She ignored the inevitable isolation of a new-comer, however, and when he appeared shook her
finger at him as she said, "Here I am, constancy itself, waiting to give you my first dance,
as I promised."

"I shall try to prove worthy," he said, earnestly. "You must remember, in extenuation, that
I have not seen the ladies of our family for a long time."

"You use the plural, and are Dot at all singular in your prolonged absence with the charming
Miss Alden. You certainly cannot look upon her as an invalid any longer, however else you may
regard her," she added, with an arch look.

"You shall now have my entire regard as long as you will permit it."

"That will depend a little upon yourself. Mamma is tired, and I'm of no account compared with
that infant upstairs; therefore I can't keep her as a chaperon this evening, and I will go
to my room as soon as you are tired of me."

"Not till then?"

"Not unless I go before."

"At some time in the indefinite future, Mrs. Wildmere, you may hope to see your daughter again."

The poor lady smiled encouragingly and gratefully. She would be most happy to have Graydon
take the brilliant creature for better or worse as soon as possible. She liked him, as did
all women, for she saw that he had a large, kindly nature. She now stole meekly away, while
he with his fair partner glided out upon the floor. All eyes followed them, and even the veterans
of society remarked that they had never seen more graceful dancing.

From her seat on the piazza Madge also watched the couple. The struggle to which she had looked
forward so long had indeed begun, and most inauspiciously. Her rival had every advantage. The
mood in which Graydon had returned predisposed him to prompt action, while she had lost her
influence for the present by a course that seemed to him so unnatural as to be prudish. Miss
Wildmere's manner gave all the encouragement that a man could wish for, and it was hard to
view with charity the smiling, triumphant belle. Madge suddenly became conscious that Mr. Muir
was observing her, and she remarked, quietly: "I never saw better dancing than that. It's grace
itself. Miss Wildmere waltzes superbly."

"Not better than you, Miss Alden," said Mr. Henderson, a young man who prided himself on his
skill in the accomplishment under consideration, and with whom she had danced several times.
"I've been looking for you, in the hope that you would favor me this evening."

She rose and passed with him through the open window. The waltz was drawing to a close; the
majority had grown weary and sat down; and soon Madge and Miss Wildmere were the only ladies
on the floor. Opinion was divided, some declaring that the former was the more graceful and
lovely, while perhaps a larger number gave their verdict for the latter.

The strains ceased, and left the couples near each other. Graydon immediately introduced Miss
Wildmere. The girls bowed a little too profoundly to indicate cordiality. Madge also presented
Mr. Henderson, hoping that he might become a partner for Miss Wildmere, and give Graydon an
opportunity to dance with her. He resolved to break the ice at once so far as his relatives
were concerned, and he conducted Miss Wildmere to Mrs. Muir, and gave her a seat beside that
lady. The girl of his choice should have not only a gallant for the evening, but also a chaperon.
He was not one to enter on timid, half-way measures; and he determined that his brother's prejudice
should count for nothing in this case. His preference was entitled to respect, and must be
respected. Of course the group chatted courteously, as well-bred people do in public, but Miss
Wildmere felt that the atmosphere was chilly. She was much too politic to permit the slightest
tinge of coldness in her manner toward those with whom she meditated such close relations should
the barring "if" melt out of the way.

The people were forming for the lancers, and Mr. Henderson asked Madge to help make up a set.
She complied without hesitation. Nor was she unmindful of the fact that Graydon sat in a position
which commanded a view of the floor. He had seen her glide out in the waltz with a grace second
only to that of Miss Wildmere, even in his prejudiced eyes. Now he again observed her curiously,
and his disappointment and bitterness at heart increased, even while she compelled his wondering
admiration. He saw that, though she lacked Miss Wildmere's conventional finish, she had a natural
grace of her own. He admitted that he had never seen so perfect a physical embodiment of womanhood.
She was slightly taller than her rival in his thoughts, and her costume gave an impression
of additional height. Apparently she was in the best of spirits, laughing often with her partner
and an elderly gentleman who danced opposite to her, and who was full of old-time flourishes
and jollity. At last Graydon thought, resentfully, "She is indeed changed. That's the style
of life she is looking forward to, and she wishes no embarrassment or advice from me. That
dancing-jack, Henderson, and others of his sort are to be her 'friends' also, no doubt. Very
well, I know how to console myself;" and he turned his eyes resolutely to Miss Wildmere.

In the galop that followed he naturally danced with his quondam sister, and Mr. Henderson with
Miss Wildmere. Graydon was the last one to show feeling in public or do anything to cause remark.
Now that Madge possessed in her partner the same advantage that Miss Wildmere had enjoyed,
the admiring lookers-on were at a loss to decide which of the two girls bore the palm; and
Graydon acknowledged that the former invalid's step had a lightness and an elasticity which
he had never known to be surpassed, and that she kept time with him as if his volition were
hers. She showed no sign of weariness, even after he began to grow fatigued. As he danced he
remembered how he had carried "the little ghost" on his arm, then tossed her, breathless from
scarce an effort, on the lounge, whence she looked at him in laughing affection. This strong,
superb creature was indeed another and an alien being, and needed no aid from him. Before he
was conscious of flagging in his step, she said, quietly, "You are growing tired, Graydon.
Suppose we return to the piazza."

"Yes," he said, a trifle bitterly, "you are the stronger now. The 'little ghost' has vanished
utterly."

"A woman is better than a ghost," was her reply.

He and Miss Wildmere strolled away down the same path on which Madge had told him that she
could not be his sister. Mr. Muir was tired, and went to his room in no very amiable humor.
Mrs. Muir waited for Graydon's return, feeling that, although the office of chaperon had in
a sense been forced upon her, she could not depart without seeing Miss Wildmere again. The
young lady at last appeared, and, believing that she had made all the points she cared for
that night, did not tax Mrs. Muir's patience beyond a few moments. While she lingered she looked
curiously at Madge, who was going through a Virginia reel as if she fully shared in the decided
and almost romping spirit with which it was danced. She was uncertain whether or not she saw
a possible rival in Graydon's thoughts, but she knew well that she had found a competitor for
sovereignty in all social circles where they might appear together. This fact in itself was
sufficient to secure the arrogant girl's ill-will and jealousy. A scarcely perceptible smile,
that boded no good for poor Madge, passed over her face, and then she took a cordial leave
of Graydon, and retired with Mrs. Muir.

He remained at the window watching, with a satirical smile, the scene within. People of almost
every age, from elderly men and matrons down to boys and girls, were participating in the old-fashioned
dance. The air was resonant with laughter and music. In the rollicking fun Madge appeared to
have found her element. No step was lighter or quicker than hers, and merriment rippled away
before her as if she were the genius of mirth. Her dark eyes were singularly brilliant, and
burned as with a suppressed excitement.

"She is bound to have her fling like the rest, I suppose," he muttered; "and that romp is more
to her than the offer of a brother's love and help--an offer half forgotten already, no doubt.
Yet she puzzles one. She never was a weak girl mentally. She was always a little odd, and now
she is decidedly so. Well, I will let her gang her ain gate, and I shall go mine."

He little dreamed that she was seeking weariness, action that would exhaust, and that the expression
of her eyes, so far from being caused by excitement, was produced by feelings deeper than he
had ever known. When the music ceased he sauntered up and told her that her sister had retired.

"I had better follow her example," she said.

"Would you not like a brief stroll on the piazza? After exertions that, in you, seem almost
superhuman, you must be warm."

"Why more superhuman in me than in others?"

"Simply because of my old and preconceived notions."

"I fear I am disappointing you in every respect. I had hoped to give you pleasure."

"Oh, well, Madge, I see we must let the past go and begin again."

"Begin fairly, then, and not in prejudice."

"Does it matter very much to you how I begin?"

"I shall not answer such questions."

"I am glad to see that you can enjoy yourself so thoroughly. You can now look forward to a
long career of happiness, Madge, since you can obtain so much from a reel."

"You do not know what I am looking forward to."

"Why?"

"Because you are not acquainted with me."

"I thought I was at one time."

"I became discontented with that time, and have tried to be different."

"And you must have succeeded beyond your wildest dreams."

"Oh, no, I've only made a beginning. I should be conceit embodied if I thought myself finished."

"What is your supreme ambition, then?"

"I am trying to be a woman, Graydon. There, I'm cool now. Good-night."

"Very cool, Madge."

He lighted a cigar and continued his walk, more perturbed than he cared to admit even to himself.
Indeed, he found that he was decidedly annoyed, and there seemed no earthly reason why there
should have been any occasion for such vexation. Of course he was glad that Madge had become
strong and beautiful. This would have added a complete charm to their old relations. Why must
she also become a mystery, or, rather, seek to appear one? Well, there was no necessity for
solving the mystery, granting its existence. "Possibly she would prefer a flirtation to fraternal
regard; possibly--Oh, confound it! I don't know what to think, and don't much care. She is
trying to become a woman! Who can fathom some women's whims and fancies? She thinks her immature
ideas, imbibed in an out-of-the-way corner of the world, the immutable laws of nature. Of one
thing at least she is absolutely certain--she can get on without me. I must be kept at too
great a distance to be officious."

This point settled, his own course became clear. He would be courtesy itself and mind his own
business.

"I fear I shall fail," murmured poor Madge, hiding her face in her pillow, while suppressed
sobs shook her frame.

CHAPTER XII

THE PROMPTINGS OF MISS WILDMERE'S HEART

Graydon slept very late the following morning. He found out that he was tired, and resolved
to indulge his craving for rest so far as his suit to Miss Wildmere would permit. When he could
do nothing to promote his advantage he proposed to be indolence itself. He found that his vexation
had quite vanished, and, in cynical good-nature, he was inclined to laugh at the state of affairs.
"Let Madge indulge her whims," he thought; "I may be the more free to pursue my purposes. Her
sister, of course, shares in Henry's prejudices against the Wildmeres, and they would influence
Madge adversely. All handsome girls are jealous of each other, and, perhaps, if what I had
so naturally hoped and expected had proved true, I should have had more sisterly counsel and
opposition than would have been agreeable. Objections now would be in poor taste, to say the
least. If I'm not much mistaken I can speak my mind to Stella Wildmere before many days pass;
and, woman-nature being such as it is, it may be just as well that I am not too intimate with
a sister who, after all, is not my sister. Stella might not see it in the light that I should;"
and so he came down at last, prepared to adapt himself very philosophically to the new order
of things.

"The world moves and changes," he soliloquized, smilingly, "and we must move on and change
with it."

He found Mr. and Mrs. Muir, with Madge and the children, ready for church, and told them, laughingly,
to "remember him if they did not think him past praying for." During his breakfast he recalled
the fact that Madge was uncommonly well dressed. "She hasn't in externals," he thought, "the
provincial air that one might expect, although her ideas are not only provincial, but prim,
obtained, no doubt, from some goody-good books that she has read in the remote region wherein
she has developed so remarkably. She has some stilted ideal of womanhood which she is seeking
to attain, and the more unnatural the ideal, the more attractive, no doubt, it appears to her."

It did not occur to him that he was explaining Madge on more theories than one, and that they
were not exactly harmonious. Having finished his meal, he sought for Miss Wildmere, and soon
found her in a shady corner, reading a light, semi-philosophical work, thus distinguishing
and honoring the day in her choice of literature. He proposed to read to her, but the book
was soon forgotten in animated talk on his part. She could skilfully play the rôle of a good
listener when she chose, and could, therefore, be a delightful companion. Her color came and
went under words and compliments that at times were rather ardent and pronounced. He soon observed,
however, that she led the way promptly from delicate ground. This might result from maidenly
reserve or from the fact that she was not quite ready for decisive words. He still believed
that he had all needed encouragement--that the expression of her eyes often answered his, and
he knew well what his meant. When, in response to his invitation, she promised to drive with
him in the afternoon, all seemed to be going as he wished.

Graydon felt that during dinner and thereafter for a time he should be devoted to his party,
to preclude criticism on his course in the late afternoon and in the evening, when he proposed
to seek society which promised more than theirs. He began to discover that, except as her intelligence
was larger, in one respect Madge had not changed from her old self. She responded appreciatively
to his thought and fancy, and gave him back in kind with interest. She began to question him
about a place in Europe with which he was familiar, and showed such unusual knowledge of the
locality that he asked, "You haven't slipped over there unknown to me, I trust?"

"You might think of an easier explanation than that. You kindly sent me books, some of which
were rather realistic."

"Did you read them all?"

"Certainly. It would have been a poor return if I had not."

"What an inordinate sense of duty you must have had!"

"I did not read them from a sense of duty. You have perhaps forgotten that I am fond of books."

"Not all of the books were novels."

"Many that were not proved the most interesting."

"Oh, indeed; another evidence of change," he said, laughing.

"And of sense, too, I think. Mr. Wayland, who is a student, had a splendid library, and he
gave me some ideas as to reading."

"Can you part with any of them?"

"That depends," she replied, with a manner as brusque as his own.

"On what?"

"The inducements and natural opportunities. I'm not going to recite a lesson like a schoolgirl."

"One would think you had been to school."

"I have, where much is taught and learned thoroughly."

"Now, that is enigmatical again."

"The best of the books you sent me left some room for the imagination."

"Ha, ha, ha, Madge! you are scoring points right along. I told you, Graydon, that you couldn't
understand her in a moment or in a week."

"I never regarded your imagination as rampant, Henry. Have you fathomed all her mystery?"

"Far from it; nor do I expect to, and yet you will grant to me some degree of penetration."

"Well, to think that I should have come home to find a sphinx instead of little Madge!"

"Thank you. A sphinx is usually portrayed with at least the head of a woman."

"In this case she has one that would inspire a Greek sculptor. Perhaps in time I may discover
a heart also."

"That's doubtful."

"Indeed."

"Yes, indeed."

"What far-fetched nonsense!" said Mrs. Muir, sententiously. "Madge has come back one of the
best and most sensible girls in the world. Men and poets are always imagining that women are
mysteries. The fact is, they are as transparent as glass when they know their own minds; when
they don't, who else should know them?"

"Who indeed?" said Graydon, laughing. "Your saving clause, Mary, is as boundless as space."

"How absurd! I understand Madge perfectly, and so does Henry."

"You said last evening that the change in her was a miracle. Once in the realm of the supernatural,
what may not one expect?"

"You knew what I meant. I referred to Madge's health and appearance and accomplishments and
all that. She has not changed in heart and feeling any more than I have, and I'm sure I'm not
a sphinx."

"No, Mary; you are a sensible and excellent wife and my very dear sister. You suggest no mystery.
Madge certainly does, for you have, in addition to all the rest, announced an indefinite list
of accomplishments."

"If I remain the subject of conversation I shall complain that your remarks are personal,"
said Madge, her brows contracting with a little vexation.

"That is what makes our talk so interesting. Personals are always read first. In drawing Mary
and Henry out, I am getting acquainted with you."

"It's not a good way. You like it merely because it teases me and saves trouble. If you must
gossip and surmise about me, wait till I'm absent."

"There, Madge, you know I'm nine-tenths in fun," said he, laughing.

"That leaves a small margin for kindly interest in an old acquaintance," was her reply as they
rose from the table, and he saw that her feelings were hurt.

"Confound it!" he thought, with irritation, "it's all so uncalled-for and unnatural! Nothing
is as it used to be. Well, then, I'll talk about books and matters as impersonal as if we were
disembodied spirits."

They had scarcely seated themselves on the piazza before Miss Wildmere came forward and introduced
her mother. The young lady was determined to prepare the way for a family party. Graydon had
a confident, opulent air, which led to the belief that her father's fears were groundless,
and that before many weeks should elapse the Muirs would have to acknowledge her openly. It
would save embarrassment if this came about naturally and gradually, and she believed that
she could be so charming as to make them covet the alliance. Miss Alden might not like it,
and the more she disliked it the better.

Mrs. Muir's thoughts were somewhat akin. "If Graydon will marry this girl, it's wise that we
should begin on good terms. This is a matter that Henry can't control, and there's no use in
our yielding to prejudice."

Therefore she was talkative, courteous, and rapidly softened toward the people whom her husband
found so distasteful. Graydon employed all his skill and tact to make the conversation general
and agreeable, but the cloud did not wholly pass from Madge's brow. From the moment of her
first cold, curious stare, years since, Miss Wildmere had antagonized every fibre of the young
girl's soul and body, and she had resolved never to be more than polite to her. She did not
look forward to future relationship, as was the case with Mrs. Muir, but rather to entire separation,
should Graydon become Miss Wildmere's accepted suitor. Now, with the instinct of self-defence,
she was more cordial to her rival than to Graydon, until, at the solicitation of the children,
she stole away. Mr. Muir remarked that he was going to take a nap, and soon followed her.

Their departure was a relief to Graydon, for it rendered the carrying out of his plan less
embarrassing. In his eagerness to be alone with the object of his hopes, he soon obtained a
carriage, and with Miss Wildmere drove away. Mrs. Muir and Mrs. Wildmere compared maternal
and domestic notes sometime longer, and then the former went to her room quite reconciled to
what now appeared inevitable.

"I think you are prejudiced, Henry," she remarked to her husband, who was tossing restlessly
on the bed.

"Least said soonest mended," was his only response, and then he changed the subject.

Graydon came back with the hope--nay, almost the certainty--of happiness glowing in his eyes.
He had spoken confidently of his business plans and prospects, and had touched upon the weariness
of his exile and his longing for more satisfactory pleasures than those of general society.
His companion had listened with an attention and interest that promised more than sympathy.
The wild, rugged scenes through which they had passed had made her delicate beauty more exquisite
from contrast. It was as if a rare tropical bird had followed the wake of summer and graced
for a time a region from which it must fly with the first breath of autumn. In distinction
from all they saw and met she appeared so fragile, such a charming exotic, that he felt an
overpowering impulse to cherish and shelter her from every rude thing in the world. With a
nice blending of reserve and complaisance she appeared to yield to his mood and yet to withhold
herself. To a man of Graydon's poise and knowledge of society such skilful tactics served their
purpose perfectly. They gave her an additional charm in his eyes, and furnished another proof
of the fineness of her nature. She could not only feel, but manifest the nicest shades of preference.
If not fully satisfied as to her own heart, what could be more refined and graceful than the
slight restraint she imposed upon him? and how fine the compliment she paid him in acting on
the belief that he was too well bred and self-controlled to precipitate matters!

"She has the tact and intuition to see," he thought, "that she can show me all the regard she
feels and yet incur no danger of premature and incoherent words. She will one day yield with
all the quiet grace that she shows when rising to accept my invitation to waltz."

Therefore, as he approached the hotel he was complacency itself until he saw Mr. Arnault on
the piazza, and then his face darkened with the heaviest of frowns.

"Why, what is the matter?" Miss Wildmere asked.

"I had hoped that this perfect afternoon might be followed by a more delightful evening, but
from the manner in which that gentleman is approaching you, it is evident that he expects to
claim you."

"Claim me? I do not think any one has that right just yet. Mr. Arnault certainly has not."

"Then I may still hope for your society this evening?"

"Have I not permitted you to be with me nearly all day? You must be more reasonable. Good-evening,
Mr. Arnault. Did you drop from the clouds?"

"There are none, and were there I should forget them in this pleasure. Mr. Muir, I congratulate
you. We have both been on the road this afternoon, but you have had the advantage of me."

"And mean to keep it, confound you!" thought Graydon. "Ah, good-evening, Mr. Arnault. You are
right; I have found rough roads preferable to smooth rails and a palace car."

"How well you are looking, Miss Stella! but that's chronic with you. This is perfectly heavenly"
(looking directly into her eyes) "after the heat of the city and my dusty journey."

"You are a fine one to talk about things heavenly after fracturing the Sabbath-day. What would
have happened to you in Connecticut a hundred years ago?"

"I should have been ridden on one rail instead of two, probably. I'm more concerned about what
will happen to me to-day, and that depends not on blue laws, but blue blood. I saw your father
this morning, and he intrusted me with a letter for you."

Mr. Arnault manifested not a particle of jealousy or apprehension, and Graydon felt himself
shouldered out of the way by a courtesy to which he could take no exception. He saw that only
Miss Wildmere herself could check his rival's resolute and easy assurance. This he now felt
sure she would do if it passed a certain point, and he went to his room, annoyed merely, and
without solicitude. "She must let the fellow down easily, I suppose," he thought; "and after
to-day I need have few fears. If she had wanted him she could have taken him long ago."

Miss Wildmere also went to her room and read her father's letter. It contained these few and
significant words: "In speaking of possible relations with Mr. M. I emphasized a small but
important word--'if.' I now commend it to you still more emphatically. You know I prefer Mr.
M. Therefore you will do well to heed my caution. Mr. M. may lose everything within a brief time."

Miss Wildmere frowned and bit her lip with vexation. Then her white face took on hard, resolute
lines. "I came near making a fool of myself this afternoon," she muttered. "I was more than
once tempted to let Graydon speak. Heavens! I'd like to be engaged to him for awhile. Mr. Arnault
plays a bold, steady hand, but he's the kind of man that might throw up the game if one put
tricks on him. My original policy is the best. I must pit one against the other in a fair and
open suit till I can take my choice. Now that it is clear that Graydon cares little for that
hideous thing he calls his sister, my plan is safe."

"What a lovely color you have, Madge!" Graydon remarked, as they met at supper. "You are unequalled
in your choice of cosmetics."

"Not to be surpassed, at any rate."

"Where did you get it?"

"Up at Grand View."

"What, have you climbed that mountain?"

"It's not much of a mountain."

"It's a tremendous mountain," cried little Harry. "Aunt Madge's been teaching us to climb,
and she lifted us up and down the steep places as if we were feathers, and she told us stories
about the squirrels and birds we saw up there. Oh, didn't we have a lovely time, Jennie?"

"Now I understand," said Graydon. "The glow in your face comes from the consciousness of good
deeds."

"It comes from exertion. Are you not making too much effort to be satirical?"

"Therefore my face should be suffused with the hue of shame. You see I have changed also, and
have become a cynic and a heathen from long residence in Europe."

"Please be a noble savage, then."

"That's not the style of heathen they develop abroad."

"Madge told us about the savages that used to live in these mountains, and how bad they were
treated," piped Jennie.

"Poor Lo! No wonder he went to the bad," said Graydon, significantly. "He was never recognized
as a man and a brother."

"And he was unsurpassed in retaliation," Madge added.

"Considering his total depravity and general innocence, that was to be expected."

"It turned out to be bad policy."

"In so far as he was a man he hadn't any policy."

"I shall not depreciate the Indians for the sake of argument. They rarely followed the wrong
trail, however."

"What on earth are you and Madge driving at?" exclaimed Mrs. Muir.

"It matters little at what, but Madge appears to be the better driver," chuckled Mr. Muir.

"You have a stanch champion in Henry," said Graydon.

"You wouldn't have him take sides against a woman?"

"Oh, no, but you have become so abundantly able to take care of yourself that he might remain
neutral."

"When you all begin to talk English again I'll join in, and now merely remark that I am grateful
to you, Madge, for taking care of the children. Jack was good with the nurse, too, and I've
had a splendid nap."

"I'm evidently the delinquent," laughed Graydon, "and have led the way in a conversation that
has been as bad as whispering in company. What will become of me? You are not going to church
to-night, Madge?"

"I did not expect to. If your conscience needs soothing--"

"Oh, no, no. My conscience has been seared with a hot iron--a cold one, I mean. The effects
are just the same."

At the supper-room door they were met by Dr. Sommers, with a world of comical trouble in his
face, and he drew Madge aside.

"What's a man to do?" he began. "Here's our choir-leader sick, and the rest won't chirp without
him. I can't sing any more than I can dance. You can--sing, I mean--both, for that matter.
I'd give the best cast of a fly I ever had to take you out in a reel. Well, here's the trouble.
It's nearly meeting-time, and what's a meeting without music? You can sing--I'm sure you can.
I've heard you twice in the chapel. Now, it isn't imposing on good-nature, is it, to ask you
to come over and start the tunes for us to-night? Come now, go with me. It will be a great
favor, and I'll get even with you before the summer is over."

Madge hesitated a moment. She had hoped for a chat with Graydon that evening, which might lead
to a better understanding, and end their tendency to rather thorny badinage. But she heard
him chatting gayly with Miss Wildmere and Mr. Arnault in the distance; therefore she said,
quietly, "It is time for me to get even with you first. To refuse would not be nice after the
lovely drive you took us the other day."

"Oh, you made that square as you went along. Well, now, this is famous. What a meeting we'll have!"

"You explain to Mrs. Muir, and I'll get my hat."

"I'm in luck," the doctor began, joining the Muirs on the piazza.

"Of course you are. You are always in luck," said Mrs. Muir.

"Oh, no, oh, no. Draw it milder than that. I've fished many a bad day. I'm in luck to-night.
What do you think? You can't guess."

"You and Madge had your heads together, and so something will happen. Are you going to capture
a mountain?"

"Yes, a brace of 'em before long. Well, as good luck would have it, our choir-leader is sick.
I thought it was bad luck at first, and meant to give him an awful dose for being so inopportune.
It has turned out famously. 'All-things work together for good,' you know. That text required
faith once when I had hooked a three-pound trout, and in my eagerness tumbled in where the
fish was. Oh, here you are, Miss Alden. We'll go right along, for it's about time."

"But you haven't explained," cried Mrs. Muir.

"We will when we come back," said the doctor.

"Oh, I'm merely going over to the chapel to help the doctor out with the singing," said Madge,
carelessly. "Good-by."

"Well," remarked Mr. Muir, sotto voce, "if I were a young fellow, there's a trail I'd follow,
and not that will-o'-the-wisp yonder."

"What did you say, Henry?" asked his wife.

"It will be hot in town to-morrow, Mary. It's growing confoundedly hot in Wall Street."

"Nothing serious, Henry?"

"It's always serious there."

"Oh, well, you'll come out all right. It's a way you have."

Mr. Muir looked grim and troubled, but the piazza was dusky. "She can't help me," he thought,
"and if she was worrying she might hinder me. Things are no worse, and they may soon be better.
If I had fifty thousand for a month, though, the strain would be over. She'd be nagging me
to take a lot of her money, and I'd see Wall Street sunk first. Well, well, Wildmere and I
may land together in the same ditch."

For a few moments Graydon and Mr. Arnault sat on either side of the broker's daughter, each
seeking the advantage. The young lady enjoyed the situation immensely, and for a time had the
art to entertain both. Arnault at last boldly and frankly took the initiative, saying, "Please
take a walk with me, Miss Wildmere. I have come all the way from New York for the pleasure
of an evening in your society. You will excuse us, Mr. Muir. You have had to-day and will have
to-morrow, for I must take an early train."

Miss Wildmere laughed, and said: "I must go with you surely, or you will think you have made
a bad 'put' in railroad tickets, as well as shares, for you are like the rest, I suppose;"
and with a smiling glance backward at Graydon she disappeared.

"You are mistaken," he said; "we foresaw this 'squeeze' in the market, and have money to lend
if the security is ample. We were never doing better."

"Poor papa!" she sighed, "his securities are lacking, I suppose. He does not write very cheerfully."

"His security is the best in the city, in my estimation. I'd take this little hand in preference
to government bonds."

"Oh, don't lend papa anything on that basis, for you would surely manage to claim the collateral,
or whatever you call it in your Wall Street jargon."

"You are infinitely better off than the majority in these hard times."

"How so?"

"By one word you can make three rich, yourself included. Your father only needs to be tided
over a few months."

"Come, come, Mr. Arnault, this is Sunday, and you must not talk business."

"My fault leans to virtue's side for once."

"I'm not just sure to which side it leans," was her laughing reply.

"Are you going to accept Muir?"

"I'm not going to accept any one at present--certainly not Mr. Muir before he asks me."

"He will ask you."

"Has he taken you into his confidence?"

"Oh, he's as patent as a country borrower."

"Mr. Arnault, we must change the subject; such questions and remarks are not in good taste,
to say the least. I appreciate your friendship, but it does not give you the right to forget
that I am a free girl, or to ignore my assurance that I propose to remain free for the present."

"That is all the assurance that I require just now," he answered. "I have been a frank, devoted
suitor, Stella. If you do not act precipitately you will act wisely in the end. I shall not
be guilty of the folly of depreciating Muir--he's a good fellow in his way--but you will soon
be convinced that you cannot afford to marry him."

"I think I can afford not to marry any one until my heart prompts me to the act," she replied,
with well-assumed dignity. Her swift thought was, "He also knows that the Muirs are embarrassed.
How is it that Graydon speaks and acts in the assured confidence of continued wealth? Is he
deceiving me?"

Mr. Arnault changed the subject, and none could do this with more adroitness than he, or be
a more entertaining gallant if he so chose. At the same time he maintained a subtle observance,
in spite of his vaunted frankness, and he soon believed he had reason to hope that Miss Wildmere
had been influenced by his words. Almost imperceptibly she permitted additional favor to come
into her manner, and when she said good-night and good-by also, in view of his early start
for the city, it was at the foot of the stairway, she casually remarking that she would not
come down again.

"My brief visit has not been in vain," he thought. "I have delayed matters, and that now means
a great deal. She will marry the survivor of this financial gale, and in every man's philosophy
the survival of the fittest is always the survival of the ego."

CHAPTER XIII

"YOU WILL BE DISAPPOINTED"

Graydon felt that it was scarcely possible to resent Mr. Arnault's tactics or to blame Miss
Wildmere. The former certainly had as good a right to be a suitor as himself, and even to his
prejudiced mind it would have been ungracious in the lady had she not given some reward for
his rival's long journey. It was natural that Mr. Arnault, an old friend of the Wildmeres,
should sit at their table and receive the consideration that he enjoyed. Graydon had little
cause for complaint or vexation, since his rival would depart in the morning, and, judging
from to-day, his own suit was approaching a successful termination. The coast would be clear
on the morrow, and he determined to make the most of opportunities. He now even regretted that
Madge and his relatives were at the house, for in some degree they trammelled his movements
by a watchful attention, which he believed was not very friendly. It would not be well to ignore
them beyond a certain point, for it was his wish to carry out his purposes with the least possible
friction. Madge's course had compelled a revision of his plans and expectations, but his intimate
relations with his brother in business made harmony and peace very essential. He felt keenly,
however, the spur of Mr. Arnault's open and aggressive rivalry, and determined to enter upon
an equally vigorous campaign.

Having reached this definite conclusion, he joined Mr. and Mrs. Muir on the piazza, and after
some desultory talk asked, "Where is Madge?"

Mrs. Muir explained, adding, "I think you might go over to the chapel and accompany her home."

"I'll be there by the time service is over," he replied.

There was sacred music in the hotel parlor, but it seemed to him neither very sacred nor very
attractive. "In the same manner the Christian as Christian cannot grant the rights of man," pp. 19,
20.

According to Bauer, the individual must sacrifice the "privilege of faith" in order to be able
to receive the general rights of man. Let us consider for a moment the so-called rights of man,
in fact the rights of man in their authentic shape, in the shape which they possess among their
discoverers, the North Americans and the French. In part these rights of man are political rights,
rights which are only exercised in the community with others.

Participation in the affairs of the community, in fact of the political community, forms their
substance. They come within the category of political freedom, of civil rights, which does not,
as we have seen, by any means presuppose the unequivocal and positive abolition of religion,
and therefore of Judaism.

It remains to consider the other aspect of human rights, the droits de l'homme apart from the
droits du citoyen.

Among them is to be found liberty of conscience, the right to practise any cult to one's liking.
The privilege of belief is expressly recognized, either as a human right or as the consequence
of a human right, of freedom.

Declaration of the rights of man and of citizenship, 1791, article 10:[7] No penalty should
attach to the holding of religious opinions.

The right of every man to practise the religious cult to which he is attached is guaranteed
by clause 1 of the Constitution of 1791.

The Declaration of the Rights of Man, etc., 1793, includes among human rights, article 7: The
free practice of cults. With respect to the right to publish ideas and opinions and to assemble
for the practice of a cult, it is even stated: The necessity for enunciating these rights presupposes
either the presence or the recent memory of a despotism.

Constitution of Pennsylvania, article 9, paragraph 3: All men have received from Nature the
imprescriptible right to worship the Almighty according to the dictates of their conscience,
and nobody may legally be constrained to follow, to institute, or to support, against his
will, any religious cult or ministry. In no case may any human authority interfere in questions
of conscience and control the prerogatives of the soul.

Constitution of New Hampshire, articles 5 and 6: Among the number of natural rights, some are inalienable
by their nature, because nothing can take their place.

Such are the rights of conscience.

The incompatibility of religion with the rights of man is thus not
implied by the conception of the rights of man, because the right
to be religious, to be religious according to one's liking, to practise
the cult of a particular religion, is expressly included among the
rights of man.

The privilege of faith is a general right of man.

The rights of man as such are distinguished from the rights of the
citizen.

What is man apart from the citizen?

Nothing else than a member of bourgeois society.

Why is the member of bourgeois society called "man," and why are
his rights called the rights of man?

How do we explain this fact?

From the relation of the political State to bourgeois society, from the meaning of political
emancipation.

Above all we must record the fact that the so-called rights of man,
as distinguished from the rights of the citizen, are nothing else
than the rights of the member of bourgeois society, that is of the
egoistic individual, of man separated from man and the community.

The most radical constitution, the Constitution of 1793, may be cited:

Declaration
of the rights of man and of the citizen.

Article 2.

These rights, etc. (natural and imprescriptible rights) are: equality,
liberty, security, property.

Of what consists liberty? Article 6.

Liberty is the power which belongs to man to do everything which
does not injure the rights of others.

Freedom is therefore the right to do and perform that which injures
none.

The limits within which each may move without injuring others are fixed by the law, as the boundary
between two fields is fixed by the fence. The freedom in question is the freedom of the individual
as an isolated atom thrown back upon itself.

Why, according to Bauer, is the Jew incapable of receiving the rights
of man?

But the right of man to freedom is not based upon the connection
of man with man, but rather on the separation of man from man.

It is the right to this separation, the right of the individual limited to himself.

The practical application of the right of man to freedom is the right
of man to private property.

In what consists the right of man to private property?

Article 16 (Const. of 1793): The right to property is the right of
every citizen to enjoy and dispose of as he likes his goods, his income,
the fruit of his toil and of his industry.

The right of man to private property is therefore the right to enjoy
and dispose of his property, at his will and pleasure, without regard
for others, and independently of society: the right of self-interest.

Each particular individual freedom exercised in this way forms the
basis of bourgeois society.

It leaves every man to find in other men not the realization, but
rather the limits of his freedom.

But it proclaims above all the right of man to enjoy and dispose
of his property, his income, and the fruit of his toil and his industry
according to his pleasure.

There still remain the other rights of man, equality and security.

Equality here in its non-political significance is nothing but the
equality of the above described liberty, viz.: every individual is
regarded as a uniform atom resting on its own bottom.

Article 5 of the Constitution of 1793 states: Equality consists in the fact that the law is the same
for all, whether it protects or whether it punishes.

And security? Article 8 of the Constitution of 1793: Security consists in the protection accorded
by society to each of its members for the preservation of his person,
his rights, and his property.

Security is the supreme social conception of bourgeois society, the conception of the police, the
idea that society as a whole only exists to guarantee to each of its members the maintenance
of his person, his rights, and his property.

By the conception of security bourgeois society does not raise itself above its egoism. Security
is rather the confirmation of its egoism.

None of the so-called rights of man, therefore, goes beyond the egoistic individual, beyond the
individual as a member of bourgeois society, withdrawn into his private interests and separated
from the community. Far from regarding the individual as a generic being, the generic life, Society
itself, rather appears as an external frame for the individual, as a limitation of his original
independence. The sole bond which connects him with his fellows is natural necessity, material
needs and private interest, the preservation of his property and his egoistic person.

It is strange that a people who were just beginning to free themselves,
to break down all the barriers between the various members of the
community, to establish a political community, that such a people
should solemnly proclaim the justification of the egoistic individual,
separated from his fellows and from the community, and should even
repeat this declaration at a moment when the most heroic sacrifice
could alone save the nation and was therefore urgently required, at
a moment when the sacrifice of all interests of bourgeois society
was imperative, and egoism should have been punished as a crime.

This fact is even stranger when we behold the political liberators degrading citizenship and
the political community to the level of a mere means for the maintenance of these so-called rights
of man, proclaiming the citizen to be the servant of the egoistic man, degrading the sphere
in which the individual behaves as a social being below the sphere in which he behaves as
a fractional being, and finally accepting as the true proper man not the individual as citizen,
but the individual as bourgeois. (Declaration of the rights, etc., of 1791, article 2.) The purpose
of government is to assure to man the enjoyment of his natural and imprescriptible rights. (Declaration
of 1793, art. 1.)

Thus even at the time when its enthusiasm was still fresh and kept at boiling point by the pressure
of circumstances, the political life proclaimed itself to be a mere
means whose end is the life of bourgeois society.

It is true that its revolutionary practice was in flagrant contradiction
to its theory.

While security, for example, was proclaimed to be a right of man,
the violation of the secrecy of correspondence was publicly proposed.

While the indefinite liberty of the press (1793 Constitution, art. 122) was guaranteed as a consequence
of the right of man to individual liberty, the freedom of the press was completely destroyed,
for liberty of the press could not be permitted when it compromised public liberty. (Robespierre
jeune, "Parliamentary History of the French Revolution."

Buchez et Roux, p. 135.) This means that the right of man to liberty ceases to be a right as
soon as it comes into conflict with the political life, whereas, according to theory, the political
life is only the guarantee of the rights of man, and should therefore be surrendered as soon
as its object contradicts these rights of man. But the practice is only the exception and the
theory is the rule. If, however, we regard the revolutionary practice as the correct position
of the relation, the riddle still remains to be solved, why the relationship was inverted in
the consciousness of the political liberators, the end appearing as the means, and the means
as the end. This optical illusion of their consciousness would still be the same riddle, although
a psychological, a theoretical riddle.

The riddle admits of easy solution.

The political emancipation is at the same time the dissolution of
the old society, upon which was based the civic society, or the rulership
alienated from the people.

The political revolution is the revolution of bourgeois society.

What was the character of the old society? It can be described in one word. Feudality. The old civic society
had a directly political character, that is, the elements of civic life, as for example property
or the family, or the mode and kind of labour, were raised to the level of elements of the community
in the form of landlordism, status, and corporation. In this form they determined the relation
of the individual to the community, that is his political relation, his relationship of separation
and exclusion from the other constituent parts of society. For the latter organization of popular
life did not raise property or labour to the level of social elements, but rather completed their
separation from the political whole and constituted them as special societies within society.
Thus the vital functions and vital conditions of society continued to be political, although political
in the sense of feudality, which means that they excluded the individual from the political
whole, and transformed the special relation of his corporation to the political whole into his
own general relation to the popular life. As a consequence of this organization, the political
unity necessarily appears as the consciousness, the will and the activity of the political unity,
and likewise the general State power as the special concern of a ruler and his servants sundered
from the people.

The political revolution, which overthrew this domination and raised
political affairs to the rank of popular affairs, which constituted
the political State as a general concern, that is as a real State,
necessarily shattered all Estates, corporations, guilds, privileges,
which were just so many expressions of the separation of the people
from their community.

The political revolution thereby abolished the political character of civic society.

It dissolved civic society into its elemental parts, on the one hand, into the individuals, on
the other hand, into the material and spiritual elements, which formed the vital content, the
civic situation of these individuals. It released the political spirit, which was imprisoned
in fragments in the various blind alleys of the feudal society; it collected all these dispersed
parts of it, liberated it from its entanglement with the civic life, and constituted it as
the sphere of the community, of the general popular concerns in ideal
independence from its particular elements of civic life.

The specific life activity and the specific life situation settled into a merely general significance.
They no longer formed the general relation of the individual to the political whole. The public
business as such became rather the general business of every individual and the political
function became his general function.

But the completion of the idealism of the State was at the same time the completion of the materialism
of civic society.

The throwing off of the political yoke was at the same time the throwing off of the bond which had
curbed the egoistic spirit of civic society. The political emancipation was at the same time
the emancipation of civic society from politics, from even the semblance of a general content.

Feudal
society was resolved into its basic elements, its individual members. But into the individuals
who really formed its basis, that is, the egoistic individual.

This individual, the member of civic society, is now the basis, the assumption of the political
State. He is recognized as such in the rights of man.

The liberty of the egoistic individual and the recognition of this liberty are, however, tantamount
to the recognition of the unbridled movement of the intellectual and material elements which inform
him.

The individual was therefore not liberated from religion; he received religious freedom. He
was not freed from property; he received freedom of property. He was not freed from the egoism
of industry; he received industrial freedom.

The constitution of the political State and the dissolution of civic society into independent individuals--whose
relation is right, as the relation of the members of Estates and of guilds was privilege--is
accomplished in one and the same act. But the individual as a member of civic society, the unpolitical
individual, necessarily appears as the natural individual. The rights of man appear as natural
rights, for the self-conscious activity concentrates itself upon the political act. The egoistic
individual is the sediment of the dissolved society, the object of immediate certitude, and
therefore a natural object. The political revolution dissolves the civic society into its constituent
parts without revolutionizing and subjecting to criticism those parts themselves. It regards
bourgeois society, the world of needs, of labour, of private interests, as the foundation of
its existence, as an assumption needing no proof, and therefore as its natural basis. Lastly,
the individual as a member of bourgeois society counts as the proper
individual, as the man in contradistinction to the citizen, because
he is man in his sensual, individual, closest existence, whereas political
man is only the abstract, artificial individual, the individual as
an allegorical, moral person.

The real man is only recognized in the shape of the egoistic individual, the true man is only
recognized in the shape of the abstract citizen.

The abstraction of the political man was very well described by Rousseau: He who dares undertake
to give instructions to a nation ought to feel himself capable as it were of changing human nature;
of transforming every individual who in himself is a complete and independent whole into part
of a greater whole, from which he receives in some manner his life and his being; of altering
man's constitution, in order to strengthen it; of substituting a social and moral existence for
the independent and physical existence which we have all received from nature. In a word, it
is necessary to deprive man of his native powers, in order to endow him with some which are
alien to him, and of which he cannot make use without the aid of
other people.

All emancipation leads back to the human world, to relationships,
to men themselves.

Political emancipation is the reduction of man, on the one side, to the member of bourgeois society,
to the egoistic, independent individual, on the other side, to the citizen, to the moral person.

Not
until the real, individual man is identical with the citizen, and has become a generic being
in his empirical life, in his individual work, in his individual relationships, not until
man has recognized and organized his own capacities as social capacities, and consequently
the social force is no longer divided by the political power, not until then will human emancipation
be achieved.

2. The Capacity of Modern Jews and Christians to become Free, by BRUNO BAUER.

Under this form Bauer deals with the relation of the Jewish and Christian religion, as well as
with the relation of the same to criticism.

Its relation to criticism is its relation "to the capacity to be free."

It follows: "The Christian has only one stage to surmount, viz.: his religion, in order to
abolish religion generally," and therefore to become free. "The Jew, on the contrary, has
to break not only with his Jewish essence, but also with the development
of the completion of his religion, with a development that has remained
alien to him"

(p. 71).

Bauer therefore transforms here the question of Jewish emancipation into a purely religious question.
The theological scruple as to who stood the most chance of being saved, Jew or Christian, is
here repeated in the enlightened form: which of the two is most capable of emancipation? It
is no longer a question of whether Judaism or Christianity makes free? but rather on the contrary:
which makes more for freedom, the negation of Judaism or the negation of Christianity?

"If they wish to be free, Jews should be converted, not to Christianity,
but to Christianity in dissolution, to religion generally in dissolution,
that is to enlightenment, criticism and its results, to free humanity,"
p. 70.

It appears that Jews have still to be converted, but to Christianity
in dissolution, instead of to Christianity.

Bauer requires Jews to break with the essence of the Christian religion,
a requirement which, as he says himself, does not arise from the development
of Jewish essentials.

As Bauer had interpreted Judaism merely as a crude-religious criticism
of Christianity, and had therefore read "only" a religious meaning
into it, it was to be foreseen that the emancipation of the Jews would
be transformed into a philosophic-theological act.

Bauer conceives the ideal abstract being of the Jew, his religion as his whole being. Consequently
he correctly infers: "The Jew gives mankind nothing, when he despises his narrow law, when he
abolishes his whole Judaism," p. 65.

The relation of Jews and Christians is therefore as follows: the sole interest of Christians in the
emancipation of the Jews is a general human, a theoretical interest.

Judaism is a detrimental fact in the religious eyes of Christians.

As soon as their eyes cease to be religious, this fact ceases to
be detrimental.

The emancipation of Jews in itself is no work for Christians.

But in order to emancipate himself, the Jew has to undertake not only his own work, but at
the same time the work of the Christian, the criticism of the synoptics, etc.

We will try to get rid of the theological conception of the question. The question of the capacity
of the Jews for emancipation is from our standpoint transformed into the question, what particular
social element has to be overcome in order to abolish Judaism?

For the capacity for emancipation of the modern Jew is the relation
of Judaism to the emancipation of the modern world.

This relation is necessarily disclosed by the special position of Judaism in the modern subjugated
world.

Let us consider the real worldly Jews, not the Sabbath Jews, as Bauer does, but the every-day
Jews.

We will not look for the secret of the Jew in his religion, but we will look for the secret of
religion in the real Jew.

What is the secular basis of Judaism?
Practical needs, egoism.

What is the secular cult of the Jew? Huckstering.
What is his secular God? Money.

Very well. Emancipation from huckstering
and from money, and therefore from practical, real Judaism would be
the self-emancipation of our epoch.

An organization of society, which
would abolish the fundamental conditions of huckstering, and therefore
the possibility of huckstering, would render the Jew impossible. His
religious consciousness would dissolve like a mist in the real vital
air of society. On the other hand: if the Jew recognizes as valueless
this his practical essence, and labours for its abolition, he would
work himself free of his previous development, and labour for human
emancipation generally, turning against the supreme practical expression
of human self-alienation.

We therefore perceive in Judaism a general
pervading anti-social element, which has been carried to its highest
point by the historical development, in which Jews in this bad relation
have zealously co-operated, a point at which it must necessarily dissolve
itself.

The emancipation of the Jews in its last significance is
the emancipation of mankind from Judaism.

The Jew has already emancipated
himself in Jewish fashion. "The Jew who in Vienna, for example, is
only tolerated, determines by his financial power the fate of the
whole Empire. The Jew who may be deprived of rights in the smallest
German State, determines the fate of Europe."

"While the corporations
and guilds excluded the Jew, the enterprise of industry laughs at
the obstinacy of the medieval institution." (Bauer, "The Jewish Question,"
p. 14.)

This is no isolated fact. The Jew has emancipated himself
in Jewish fashion, not only by taking to himself financial power,
but by virtue of the fact that with and without his co-operation,
money has become a world power, and the practical Jewish spirit has
become the practical spirit of Christian nations. The Jews have emancipated
themselves in so far as Christians have become Jews.

"The pious and
politically free inhabitant of New England," relates Colonel Hamilton,
"is a kind of Laokoon, who does not make even the slightest effort
to free himself from the serpents which are throttling him. Mammon
is his god, he prays to him, not merely with his lips, but with all
the force of his body and mind.

"In his eyes, the world is nothing
more than a Stock Exchange, and he is convinced that here below he
has no other destiny than to become richer than his neighbours. When
he travels, he carries his shop or his counter on his back, so to
speak, and talks of nothing but interest and profit." If you could keep me
in mind for years, I can hope I am not forgotten during the hours when others have claims upon
you. I have ever kept you in mind, and I might say more. If women have a little natural spite,
men in some situations are endowed with enormous selfishness, and the bump of appropriation
grows almost into a deformity."

"I never expect to see deformities of any kind in Graydon Muir," she said, laughing. "Now that
we understand each other so well, give me your hand and pull me up this steep place before
which we have stood so long, while getting over another little steep place that lay in our
path. I'm glad the others have all gone on, for now you can help me all you choose, and I shan't
care."

He did help her, with a touch and freedom that grew into something like caresses. He felt that
he had revealed himself almost as completely as if he had spoken his love, and that he had
received and was receiving more than encouragement. She did not rebuke his manner, which was
that of a lover. There was no committal in that, nothing that could bind her. She permitted
the avowal of his hope, that he had been in her thoughts during his long absence, and the natural
inference that her hand was still free because of his hold upon her heart. This belief filled
him with gratitude, and inspired him, as she intended it should, with generous thoughts and
impulses toward her. What if she did prefer to maintain a little longer the delicate half reserve
that precedes a positive engagement? It only insured that the cup of happiness should be sipped
and enjoyed more leisurely. She had seen too much of life, and enjoyed too many of its pleasures,
to act with precipitation now. She understood him, and yet loved him well enough to be jealous
of one whom she believed that he regarded as a sister. With amusement he thought: "She is not
even that to me now. Hanged if I know what she is to me beyond a pretty, vexatious puzzle!"

Miss Wildmere's strategy had accomplished one thing, however. Believing that he was absolved
by Madge's course from everything beyond cordial politeness, he had resolved to carry out her
rival's wishes. It was no great cross to forego Madge's society, and if Miss Wildmere saw that
he was not consoling himself during the hours she spent with Arnault, she would shorten them
in his behalf.

After reaching a certain point he suggested: "Instead of scaling that rocky height after the
rest of the party, suppose we follow this grassy wood-road to parts unknown. It will be easier
for you than climbing, and you are better society than a crowd."

She assented smilingly, and Madge did not see Graydon again until they met at dinner.

She was pale, and looked weary. "Oh," she thought, "perhaps my hopes are already vain! They
have been alone all the morning. He may have spoken; he looks so happy and content that he
must have spoken and received the answer he craved. If so, I shall soon join the Waylands in
my native village, for I can't keep up much longer without a little hope."

"You are tired, Madge," he said, not unkindly.

"A little," she replied, carelessly. "A short nap this afternoon will insure my being ready
for the hop to-night."

CHAPTER XV

PERPLEXED AND BEGUILED

Madge was so discouraged that she contented herself with a manner of listless apathy during
dinner, and then retired to her room. Graydon was giving her so little thought that there was
slight occasion for disguise, and less incentive for effort to interest him.

"The struggle promises to be short and decisive," she moaned. "Perhaps it has been already
decided. I had no chance after all. He came here fully committed in his own thoughts to Miss
Wildmere. I have merely lost my old place in his affection, and have had and shall have no
opportunity to win his love. If this is to be my fate it is well to discover it so speedily,
and not after weeks of torturing hope and fear. I'll learn the truth with absolute certainty
as soon as possible, and then find a pretext to join the Waylands."

At last the fatigue of the morning brought the respite of sleep, and when she waked she found
late evening shadows in her room, and learned that Mr. Muir had arrived, it being his purpose
to spend the Fourth and the remainder of the week with his family.

Weariness and despondency are near akin, and in banishing one Madge found herself better able
to cope with the other. At any rate, she determined to show no weakness. If Graydon would never
love her he should at least be compelled to respect and admire her, and he should never have
cause to surmise the heart-poverty to which she was doomed. Still less would she give her proud
rival a chance to wound her again. Miss Wildmere might make Graydon's devotion as ostentatious
as she pleased, but should never again detect on Madge's face a look of pained surprise and
solicitude.

She made a careful toilet for the evening, telling Mr. Muir and her sister not to wait for
her, as she had overslept herself.

"Where is Madge?" Graydon asked, at the supper-table.

"She did not wake up in time to come down with us," Mrs. Muir replied. "What does it matter?
Miss Wildmere so fills your eyes that you see no one else. When is it to be, Graydon?"

"Madge evidently sees quite as much of me as she cares to," he replied, somewhat irritably.
"I have not asked when it's to be or whether it's to be at all. I suppose," he added, satirically,
"that in consideration of my extreme youth I should obtain permission from my family before
venturing to ask anything."

"That remark is absurd and uncalled for," Mr. Muir replied, gravely. "Of course you will please
yourself, as I did, and we shall make the best of it. But you have no right to expect that
we shall see the lady with your eyes. I cannot help seeing her as she is. I do not like her,
but if you choose to marry her, rest assured I shall give neither of you cause for complaint.
Now, according to my custom, I've had my say. You could not expect me, as your brother, to
be indifferent; still less could I pretend an approval that I don't feel; but I recognize that
you are as free as I was when Mary's suitor, and I do not think you can reasonably ask more.
Our relations are too intimate for misunderstanding. You know that, in my present plans and
hopes, I looked forward to receiving you as a partner at no distant time, if such purposes
are carried out our interests must always be identical."

"Pardon me, Henry," said Graydon, warmly, "and do not misunderstand my hasty words. I know
you have my best welfare at heart--you have ever proved that--but you misjudge my choice. Even
Mary begins to see that you do, and woman's insight is keener than man's. You attribute to
the daughter the qualities you dislike in the father. Is it nothing that she has waited for
me during my long absence, when she could pick and choose from so many?"

"I'm not sure she has been waiting for you; her manner toward Mr. Arnault yonder suggests that
she may still pick and choose."

"Bah! I'm not afraid of him. She could have taken him long since had she so wished."

Others who had seats at the table now approached, and prevented further interchange of words
on so delicate a subject. Nevertheless Mr. Muir's arrow had not flown wide of the mark, and
Graydon thought that Miss Wildmere was unnecessarily cordial toward his rival, and that Mr.
Wildmere, who had also come from the city, was decidedly complacent over the fact.

Graydon's furtive observation was now cut short by the entrance of Madge, and even he was dazzled
by a beauty that attracted many eyes. It was not merely a lovely woman who was advancing toward
him, but a woman whose nature was profoundly excited. What though she moved in quiet, well-bred
grace, and greeted Mr. Muir with natural cordiality? The aroused spiritual element was not
wanting in the expression of her face or in the dignity of her carriage. Her deep, suppressed
feeling, which bordered on despair; her womanly pride, which would disguise all suffering at
every cost, gave to her presence a subtle power, felt none the less because intangible. It
was evident that she neither saw nor cared for the strangers who were looking their curiosity
and admiration; and Graydon understood her barely well enough to think, "Something, whatever
it may be, makes her unlike other girls. She was languidly indifferent at dinner; now she is
superbly indifferent. This morning and yesterday she was a gay young girl, eager for a mountain
scramble or a frolic of any kind. How many more phases will she exhibit before the week is over?"

Poor Madge could not have answered that question herself. She was under the control of one
of the chief inspirations of feeling and action. Moods of which she had never dreamed would
become inevitable; thoughts which nothing external could suggest would arise in her own heart
and determine her manner.

In ceasing to hope one also ceases to fear, and Graydon admitted to himself that he had never
before felt the change in Madge so deeply. The weak, timid little girl he had once known now
looked as if she could quietly face anything. The crowded room, the stare of strangers, were
simply as if they were not; the approach of a thunder-gust in the sultry evening was unheeded;
when a loud peal drowned her voice, she simply waited till she could be heard again, and then
went on without a tremor in her tones, while all around her people were nervous, starting,
and exclaiming. There was not the faintest suggestion of high tragedy in her manner. To a casual
observer it was merely the somewhat proud and cold reserve of a lady in a public place, while
under the eyes of a strange and miscellaneous assemblage. Graydon imagined that it might veil
some resentment because he had been so remiss in his attentions. He could scarcely maintain
this view, however, for she was as cordial to him as to any one, while at the same time giving
the impression that he was scarcely in her thoughts at all.

Mr. Muir was perplexed also, and watched her with furtive admiration. "If she cares for Graydon's
neglect she's a superb actress," he thought. "Great Scott! what an idiot he is, that he cannot
see the difference between this grand woman and yonder white-faced speculator! She actually
quickens the blood in my veins to-night when she fixes her great black eyes on me." 

The upper story is also decagonal, and is reached by a flight of modern stone steps. The roof is
composed of a single block of Istrian limestone, scooped out like a shallow bowl inside; and,
being the biggest roof-stone I ever saw, I will give you the dimensions. It is thirty-six feet
in diameter, hollowed out to the depth of ten feet, four feet thick at the center, and two feet
nine inches at the edges, and is estimated to weigh two hundred tons. Amalasuntha must have
had help in getting it up there. The lower story is partly under water. The green grass of the
inclosure in which it stands is damp enough for frogs. An old woman opened the iron gate to
let us in. Whether she was any relation of the ancient proprietor, I did not inquire; but she had
so much trouble in, turning the key in the rusty lock, and letting us in, that I presume we were the
only visitors she has had for some centuries.

Old women abound in Ravenna; at least, she was not young who showed us the mausoleum of Galla Placidia.
Placidia was also prudent and foreseeing, and built this once magnificent
sepulcher for her own occupation.

It is in the form of a Latin cross, forty-six feet in length by about forty in width. The floor
is paved with rich marbles; the cupola is covered with mosaics of the time of the empress; and
in the arch over the door is a fine representation of the Good Shepherd. Behind the altar is the
massive sarcophagus of marble (its cover of silver plates was long ago torn off) in which are literally
the ashes of the empress.

She was immured in it as a mummy, in a sitting position, clothed in imperial robes; and there
the ghastly corpse sat in a cypress-wood chair, to be looked at by anybody who chose to peep
through the aperture, for more than eleven hundred years, till one day, in 1577, some children
introduced a lighted candle, perhaps out of compassion for her who sat so long in darkness,
when her clothes caught fire, and she was burned up,--a warning to all children not to play with
a dead and dry empress. In this resting-place are also the tombs of Honorius II., her brother,
of Constantius III., her second husband, and of Honoria, her daughter.

There

are no other undisturbed tombs of the Caesars in existence. Hers is almost the last, and the very small
last, of a great succession.

What thoughts of a great empire in ruins do not force themselves
on one in the confined walls of this little chamber!

What a woman was she whose ashes lie there!

She saw and aided the ruin of the empire; but it may be said of her,
that her vices were greater than her misfortunes.

And what a story is her life!

Born to the purple, educated in the palace at Constantinople, accomplished
but not handsome, at the age of twenty she was in Rome when Alaric
besieged it.

Carried off captive by the Goths, she became the not unwilling object of the passion of King
Adolphus, who at length married her at Narbonne. At the nuptials the king, in a Roman habit,
occupied a seat lower than hers, while she sat on a throne habited as a Roman empress, and
received homage. Fifty handsome youths bore to her in each hand a dish of gold, one filled with
coin, and the other with precious stones,--a small part only, these
hundred vessels of treasure, of the spoils the Goths brought from
her country. The
music ceased; cries of terror resounded; but the momentary transfiguration of the girl before
him had been so strange and so impressive that Graydon forgot all else, and still gazed at
her with something like awe in his face. Her lip trembled, for the nervous tension was growing
too severe. "Why do you look at me so?" she faltered. "What has happened? Is there danger?"

"What has happened, Madge, that I cannot understand you? The electric gleam made you look like
an angel of light. Your face seemed light itself. Are you so true and good, Madge, that such
vivid radiance brings out no stain or fear? What is it that makes you unlike others?" Instinctively
he looked toward Miss Wildmere. Her face was buried in her hands, and Mr. Arnault was bending
over her with reassuring words.

Madge felt her self-control departing. "Mary is afraid in a thunderstorm," she said, in a low
tone. "I'll go to her. She does not find me so puzzling;" and she hastened away, yet not so
swiftly but that he saw her quivering lip and look of trouble.

He took a few impulsive steps in pursuit, then hesitated and walked irresolutely down a hallway,
that he might have a chance for further thought. The alarm and confusion were so great that
the little episode had been unnoted. It had made an impression on Graydon, however, that he
could not shake off readily.

Emotion, if forced, has little power except to repel, but even a glimpse of deep, suppressed
feeling haunts the memory, especially if its cause is half in mystery.

Madge had set her heart on one thing, had worked long and patiently for its attainment, had
hoped and prayed for it, and within the last few hours was feeling the bitterness of defeat.
The event she so dreaded seemed inevitable, even if it had not already occurred. The expression
on Graydon's face when she had first met him after his long ramble with Miss Wildmere had been
that of a tranquilly happy lover, whose heart was at rest in glad certainty. Why should he
not have spoken? what greater encouragement could he ask than the favor she herself had seen?
During his long absence another girl had apparently been waiting for him also, "But not working
for him," she sighed, "and keeping herself aloof from all and everything that would render
her less worthy. While I sought to train heart, body, and soul to be a fit bride, she has dallied
with every admirer she met, and now wins him without one hour of self-denial or effort. It
is more bitter than death to me. It is cruelty to him, for that selfish girl will never make
him happy. Even after he marries her he will be only one among many, and the ballroom glare
will be more to her than the light of her own hearth."

Such thoughts had been in Madge's mind, and self-control had been no easy matter. When to all
had been added the excitement of the storm and his unexpected words, her overstrained nerves
gave way. She was too desperately unhappy for the common fear which temporarily overwhelmed
many--the greater swallows up the less--but the storm had led to words that both wounded and
alarmed her. Why did she so perplex him? What had the lightning's gleam revealed, to be understood
when he should think it all over? Could the truth of her love, of which she was so conscious,
be detected in spite of her efforts and disguises? Was she doomed, not only to failure and
an impoverished life, but also to the humiliation of receiving a lifelong, yet somewhat complacent
pity from Graydon, and possibly the triumphant scorn of her rival?

With these thoughts surging in her mind she locked herself in her room and sobbed like the
broken-hearted girl she felt herself to be. The passing storm was nothing to her. A heavier
storm was raging in her soul, nor had it ceased when the skies without grew cloudless and serene.
She at last felt that she must do something to maintain her disguise. Hearing little Jack crying
and Mrs. Muir trying to hush him, she washed her eyes and went to the partially darkened room
where the child was, and said, "Let me take him, Mary, and you go down and see Henry."

"It's awfully good of you, Madge. The children have been so frightened that I've been up here
all the evening. You seem to have better luck in quieting Jack than any of us."

"He'll be good with me. Go down at once, and don't worry. You have hardly had a chance to see
Henry."

"You will come down again after Jack goes to sleep?"

"Yes, if I feel like it."

Graydon soon discovered Mrs. Muir after she had joined her husband, and asked, "Where is Madge?"

"She has kindly taken the baby so that I can spend a little time with Henry. The children have
been frightened, and Jack is very fretful. I'm tired out, and don't know what I should do if
it wasn't for Madge."

"Why can't the nurse take him?"

"He won't go to her in these bad moods. Madge can quiet him even better than I. What's the
matter that you are so anxious to see Madge? You have seemed abundantly able to amuse yourself
without her the last few days. Is Mr. Arnault in the way to-night?"

"As if I cared a rap for him!" said Graydon, turning irritably away.

He did care, however, and felt that Miss Wildmere was making too much use of the liberty she
had provided for. She, like many others, could be half hysterical while the violence of the
storm lasted, and yet, when quiet was restored, was capable of making a jest of her fears and
the most of a delightful conjunction of affairs, which placed two eligible men at her beck,
to either of whom she could become engaged before she slept. The arrival of her father had
turned the scale decidedly in favor of Mr. Arnault, for the latter, without revealing his transaction
with Mr. Muir, had whispered to Mr. Wildmere his conviction that Henry Muir was borrowing at
ruinous interest. This information accorded with the broker's previous knowledge, and he was
eager that his daughter should decide for Arnault at once.

This, however, the wilful girl would not do. She enjoyed the present condition of affairs too
well, and was not without hope, also, that her father was mistaken; for she felt sure, from
Graydon's manner, that he was not aware of his brother's financial peril, and this fact inclined
her to doubt its existence. She was actuated by the feeling that she had given much time and
encouragement to Graydon, and that now Arnault should have his turn. Madge had been invisible
since the storm, and there was nothing to indicate that Graydon was disposed to give her much
thought. Miss Wildmere's natural supposition was that he and Madge had been like brother and
sister once, and that the form of the relation still existed, but that in their long separation
they had grown somewhat indifferent toward each other. She believed that the solicitude she
had seen in Madge's face, on the evening so memorable in the latter's experience, was due to
the jealousy of an immature, sickly girl, who had been so humored as to feel that Graydon belonged
to her. She naturally believed that if there had been anything beyond this, it would have been
developed by correspondence, or else indifference on both sides would not now be so palpable.
She disliked Madge chiefly as a rival in beauty and admiration. Nothing could be more clear
than that Graydon was completely under the spell of her own fascination, and that Madge was
receiving even scant fraternal regard. All she feared was, that during the process of keep
him "well in hand" he might become more conscious of Madge's attractions, which she recognized,
however much she decried them openly. Even if compelled by circumstances to accept Arnault,
she proposed to herself the triumph of rejecting Graydon, and thought she could do this so
skilfully as to give the idea that he had made a deep impression on her heart, and so eventually
win him again as one of her devoted followers in the future. This product of fashionable society
had not the slightest intention of giving up her career as a belle for the sake of Mr. Arnault
or any one else. She had more liking and less fear for Graydon than for Arnault. The latter
was an open, resolute suitor, but she knew that he was controlled more by ambition than by
affection--that he would yield everything and submit to anything up to a certain point. The
moment she jeopardized his prestige before the world, or interfered with his scheme of success,
she would meet rock-like obduracy, both before and after marriage. She knew that Graydon had
a sincere affection for her, and a faith in her which, even in her egotism, she was aware was
unmerited--that he had a larger, gentler, and more tolerant nature, and would be easier to
manage than Arnault.

Her fear of the latter proved his best ally. There was a resolution in his eye since his return
this evening that, even while it angered her somewhat, convinced her that he would not be trifled
with. His suit was that of a man who had an advantage which she dared not ignore, and her father's
manner increased this impression. She felt that her game was becoming delicate and hazardous,
but she would not forego its delicious excitement, or abandon the hope that Graydon might still
be in a position to warrant her preference. Therefore she proposed to yield to Arnault as far
as she could without alienating Muir, hoping that the former would soon return to town again,
and thus more time be secured for her final decision.

Before the first evening of his rivals advent had passed, Graydon felt that he must appear
to the people in the house as supplanted, and his pride was beginning to be touched. Mrs. Muir's
words had added to his irritation. The episode with Madge had left a decidedly unpleasant impression.
He felt not only that he had failed to understand her, but that he might be treating her with
a neglect which she had a right to resent. Her appearance and manner during the storm had almost
startled him; her abrupt departure had caused sudden and strong compunction; and he had wished
that they might come to a better understanding; but thoughts of her had soon given place to
anxiety in regard to Miss Wildmere. It began to seem strange that the girl who had apparently
waited for him so long, and who had permitted such unequivocal words and manner on his part
that day, should now, before his very eyes, be accepting attentions even more unmistakable
from another man. She had tried to explain and prepare him for all this, but there was more
than he was prepared for. She not only danced oftener with Arnault than with any one else,
but also strolled with him on the dusky piazza, which, by reason of the dampness due to the
storm, was almost deserted. Graydon had permitted his brow to become clouded, and was so perturbed
by the events of the evening that he had not disguised his vexation by gallantries to others.
At last he detected smiles and whispered surmises on the part of some who had seen his devotion
before the arrival of Mr. Arnault. This almost angered him, and he felt that Miss Wildmere
had imposed a rôle that would be difficult to maintain.

He had lingered conspicuously near, intent on proving his loyalty, and had hoped every moment
that his opportunity would come. He felt that she should at least divide her time evenly with
him and Mr. Arnault, but the evening was drawing to a close, and the latter had received the
lion's share. After noting that others were observing his desolation, he went resolutely out
on the piazza, with the intention of asking Miss Wildmere to give him the last waltz. Its wide
space was deserted. He waited a few moments, thinking that the object of his thoughts would
turn the corner in her promenade with his rival. Time passed, and she did not come. He looked
through a parlor window, thinking that she might have entered by some other means of ingress;
and while he was standing there steps slowly approached from a part of the piazza which was
usually in utter darkness, and which was known as the "lovers' retreat." As the figures passed
a lighted window he recognized them, and was also observed. He was too angry and jealous now
to carry out his purpose, and returned to the general hallway.

Here he was joined a moment later by Miss Wildmere and Mr. Arnault, and the former began to
chat with him in imperturbable ease, while the gentleman bowed and sought another partner for
the waltz that was about to be danced. Graydon would not show his chagrin under the many eyes
directed toward them, but she nevertheless saw his anger in the cold expression of his eyes,
and realized her danger. She ignored everything with inimitable skill and sweetness, and there
was nothing for him to do but take her out with the others. Indeed, it almost instantly became
his policy to convince observers that their surmises were without foundation. He determined
that the girl should show him all the favor his rival had enjoyed, or else--A sudden flash
of his eyes indicated to his observant companion that all her skill would be required. She
was graciousness itself, and when Arnault could not observe her, stole swift and almost pleading
glances into her partner's eyes.

Another observed her, however. Madge did come down at last, for she had concluded that the
memorable day should not close until she had had one more glimpse of the problem which had
grown so dark and hopeless. Graydon soon observed her standing in the doorway, but then she
was talking and laughing with a lady friend. A moment later she glided out on the floor with
one of a half dozen who had been waiting for the favor. Graydon sought to catch her eye, but
did not succeed. Again she made upon his mind the impression of troubled perplexity, but his
purpose was uppermost, and he was bent on carrying it out.

"Come," he said to Miss Wildmere, in quiet tones, "I should enjoy a stroll on the piazza, the
room has grown so warm and close."

Feeling that she must yield, she did so with ready grace and apparent willingness, and Graydon
led her out through the main entrance, that it might be observed that he received no less favor
than had been given to another.

"She is playing them both pretty strong," whispered one of the committee, before referred to,
that sits perpetually on the phases of life at such resorts.

"I feared you would not be very patient," said Miss Wildmere, in a low tone.

"I said I would be reasonably patient," was the reply.

"Reason again."

"Yes, Miss Wildmere; I think I can justly say that I am endowed with both heart and reason.
There are some questions in life that demand both."

"Please do not speak so coldly. You do not understand."

"I wish I did."

"Be patient and you will. After maintaining friendship true and strong for years, it hurts
me to be misjudged now."

"But, Miss Wildmere--" he began, impetuously.

"Hush," she said, hastily; then added, a little coldly, "if I am not worthy of a little trust
I am not worthy of anything."

Graydon was touched to the quick. Honorable himself, he felt that he was acting meanly and
suspiciously--that his jealousy and irritation were leading him to unmanly conduct. There was
some reason for her course, which would be explained eventually, and he ought not to ask a
woman to be his wife at all unless he could trust her. Therefore he said, humbly. "I beg your
pardon. In my heart I believe you worthy of all trust. I will wait and be as patient as you
desire, since I know that you cannot have failed to understand me." Then he added, with a deprecating
laugh, "There are times, I suppose, when all men are a little blind and unreasonable."

"Heaven keep him blind!" she thought, yet she winced under his honest words in their contrast
with herself.

"I hope some day to prove worthy of your trust," she breathed, softly, and looked in dread
into the darkness lest in some way her words should reach Arnault. "Come, please," she added,
with a gentle pressure on his arm, "let us return, or the hotel may be closed upon us."

"Please give me all the time you can," pleaded Graydon, as they paused at the door.

Looking within, she saw Arnault with his back toward them, and said, hastily, and as if impulsively,
"I will--all that I can. Possibly my regret will be deeper than yours that I cannot give you more."

"You should know that that is not possible," he said, in low, earnest tones. Then he added,
in a whisper, as she was entering, "I can trust you now and wait."

"My good fortune is still in the ascendant," was her thought; "I can still keep him in hand,
in spite of papa and Mr. Arnault."

"Her father's relations with Mr. Arnault must give him some hold upon her," he thought, "and
for her father's sake she cannot yield to me at once, but she will eventually."

Mr. Arnault came forward with smiling lips, light words, yet resolute eyes. Graydon felt that
he had received all the assurance that he needed--that she was under some necessity of keeping
his rival in good-humor--so he smiled significantly into her eyes, and bowed himself away.

"Muir looked as if he had received all the comfort that he required," Arnault said, as they
strolled across the parlor, now deserted.

"Did he? Well, he did not require very much."

"How much?"

"You had better ask him."

"Stella," he said, and there was a suggestion of menace in his tone, "I'm in earnest now. You
will soon have to choose between us."

"Shall I?" she replied, bending upon him an arch, bewildering smile. "Then please don't speak
as if I had no choice at all;" and she was going.

"Wait," he said. "Will you drive with me to-morrow?"

"Yes. Is there anything else your lordship would like?"

He seized her hand, and held it in both his. "This," he said.

"Is that all?" was her laughing reply, as she withdrew it. "I wish you had more of Mr. Muir's
diffidence;" and she vanished before he could speak again.

Graydon found that Madge had retired, so that there was no chance for him to speak to her that
night; but his mind was in too happy a tumult to give her much thought.

CHAPTER XVI

DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

Mrs. Muir came into Madge's room for a bit of the gossip that she dearly loved, but, as usual,
obtained little information or surmise from the young girl. "I'm glad you came down," she said,
"if only to prove to Graydon that you were not moping upstairs."

"Why should I mope upstairs?" Madge asked, with a keen look at her sister.

"No reason that I know of, only Graydon has been slightly spoiled by his success among ladies,
and society men are always imagining that girls are languishing for them."

"Have I given him or anyone such an impression?" Madge again inquired, indignantly.

"Oh, no, indeed! On the contrary, you seem so indifferent as not to be quite natural. Even
Graydon feels it, and is perplexed and troubled. He was inquiring for you during the evening,
and I told him you were kindly caring for Jack, so that I might have a little fresh air with
Henry on the piazza."

"There it is again--perplexed and troubled. I'm sick of being misunderstood so ridiculously.
The scraps of time that he gives me when Miss Wildmere does not fill his eyes and thoughts
are employed in criticism. Why should I perplex and trouble him? I have told him to please
himself with Miss Wildmere--that I should certainly please myself in my choice of friends,
and that he as a man assuredly had a right to do the same. He will soon be engaged to her,
and probably is already, but he has no right to demand that I should receive this girl with
open arms. She already detests me, and I do not admire her. It's none of my business, but if
I were a man I wouldn't stand her flirtation with Mr. Arnault. Even the people in the house
are observing it with significant smiles. He must get over the impression that I'm the weak,
limp child in mind or body that he left. I'm an independent woman, and have as much right to
my thoughts and ways as he to his. If he wants my society, let him treat me with natural friendliness.
If he's afraid to do it--if Miss Wildmere won't let him--rest assured I won't receive any furtive,
deprecatory attentions. I am abundantly able to take care of myself in my own way."

"Oh, Madge, you have so changed! Before you went away the sun seemed to rise and set in Graydon."

"Well, the sun now rises in the west and sets in the east--What am I saying? Well, perhaps,
it's true for me, after all. In the West I gained the power to live a strong, resolute life
of my own choosing, and he may as well recognize the truth first as last. Let him give all
his thoughts to Miss Wildmere. From what I see and have heard she will keep them busy before
and after marriage."

"He's not engaged to her yet; he said so positively."

"Oh, well," Madge replied, with well-assumed indifference, although her heart bounded at the
tidings, "it's only a question of time. There, we've talked enough about her. Of course I remember
Graydon's old kindness, and all that; and if he would treat me with frank and sensible friendliness,
I should enjoy his society. Why not?"

"I thought he regarded you as his sister."

"Sister, indeed! I'm Henry's sister, not his. I'm only an object of criticism, of perplexity,
a sphinx, and all that kind of nonsense. He was bent on seeing a 'little ghost,' as he used
to call me. I'm not a bit of a ghost, and have as much proud blood in my veins as he has."

"Well, Madge, I'm glad you feel that you are Henry's sister. He likes and admires you so much
that I'm half jealous."

"Henry and I understand each other. He thinks I'm sensible, and I certainly think he is. Good-night,
now, dear. It's after twelve, and I wish you a merry Fourth of July; I mean to have one."

Graydon had not found himself in a sleeping mood until the shadows of night were almost ready
to depart, and so came down very late. Mrs. Wildmere, who was on the piazza with her child,
informed him, with a deprecatory smile, that Stella had gone to drive with Mr. Arnault. He
bit his lip, and went to make a leisurely breakfast. By the time he had finished, Madge came
in with a party of young people who had been on a ramble. Her greeting was friendly, but nothing
more, and having received a long letter from Mrs. Wayland, she took it to a small summer-house.
Graydon soon strayed after her in a listless way, and in no very amiable humor. The greater
anxiety had swallowed up the less, and his perturbed thoughts about Madge were now following
a light carriage on some wild mountain road. His generous glow of feeling of the night before
had passed somewhat, and he was inclined to think that Miss Wildmere's relations to Arnault,
whatever they were, placed him, a committed lover, in a rather anomalous position. Since she
was absent, however, he would while away an hour with Madge, and try to solve the riddle she
had become.

She greeted him with a slight smile, and went on with her letter. He watched her curiously
and with contracting brow.

"Will you ever finish?" he soon asked.

"I can read it some other time," she said, laying it down.

"Oh, that is asking far too much!"

"Is it?"

"Confound it, Madge! Why is it that we are drifting further and further apart every day?"

"I am not drifting," she said, quietly, "nor do you give that impression. I am just where you
found me on your return. Since we are so far apart you must be doing the journeying."

"Well, Heaven knows I found you distant enough!"

"I beg your pardon; Heaven knows nothing of the kind! It's not my fault that you value friendship
so lightly."

"You know I wished for so much more."

"You thought you did at first, Graydon," she replied, with a quiet smile, "but I imagine that
you soon became quite reconciled to my view of the case. The relation would surely prove embarrassing
to you. Haven't you since thought that it might?" she asked, with sweet directness.

He colored visibly, and was provoked with himself that he did. "If you persist in being at
swords' points with Miss Wildmere--" he began, hesitatingly.

"I persist in being simply myself, and true to my own perceptions. Wherein have I failed in
courtesy toward Miss Wildmere?"

"But you dislike her most cordially."

"And you like her most cordially and more. Have I not granted your perfect right to do so?"

"If you were even the friend you claim to be, you would not be so indifferent."

"I have not said I was indifferent. Miss Wildmere is far from indifferent to me. What have
I done to gain her ill-will?"

"Much, as human nature goes. You have made yourself her rival in beauty and attractiveness."

"Is that human nature? If that is the cause of her hostility I should say it is Miss Wildmere's
nature."

"Let us change the subject," said Graydon, a little irritably. "We shall not agree on this
point, I fear; you share in Henry's prejudices."

"I did not introduce the subject, Graydon, and I think for myself."

"Hang it all, Madge! you are so changed I scarcely know you. Every time we meet I find you
more of a conundrum. Friend, indeed! You certainly have been a distant one in every sense.
If I had been the friend you say I was, you would have written me about the marvellous transformation
you were accomplishing."

She sprang up, and her dark eyes flashed indignantly. "I am beginning to think that you are
changed more than I," she said, impetuously. "You know, or might, if you took the trouble,
that I did not tell Mary, my own sister, of my progress toward health and strength. My wish
to give you all a pleasant surprise may seem a little thing to you, or you may give some sinister,
unnatural meaning to the act. It was not a little thing to go away 'a ghost, a wraith,' as
you were wont to call me--it was not a little thing to go away alone, perhaps to die, as I
then felt. Nor was it a little thing to battle for weary months with weakness of mind and body,
morbid timidity, indolence, ignorance, and everything that was contrary to my ideal of womanhood.
I can say thus much in self-defence. Was there harm in my adding some incentive to a hard sense
of duty? I felt that if I could change for the better and keep my secret I could give you all
a glad surprise. I had almost a child's pleasure in the thought. Mary and Henry rewarded me,
but you are spoiling it all. You at once make an impossible demand, and discover, within twenty-four
hours, how awkward my compliance would have been. I did not know you so long without gaining
the power of guessing your thoughts. I suggested a simple, natural relation, and as the result
I have become a 'conundrum.' A charming title, truly! I shall remain a simple, natural girl,
and when you are through with your riddle theories perhaps you will treat me as I think you
might in view of old times;" and she started swiftly toward the house.

"Madge!" cried Graydon, springing up and following her.

At that moment Miss Wildmere approached, and Madge gained the piazza and disappeared, leaving
Graydon ill disposed toward himself and all the world, even including Miss Wildmere; for she
had a charming color, and appeared not in the least a victim to ennui because of forced association
with an objectionable party. She came smilingly toward him, saying, "It's too bad to interrupt
your hot pursuit of another lady, but girls have not much conscience in such matters."

"As long as you have conscience in other matters, it does not signify," he answered, meaningly.

"Not conscience, but another organ, controls our action chiefly, I imagine," she replied, with
a glance that gave emphasis to her words of the previous evening, and she passed smilingly on.

Arnault soon followed her, spoke pleasantly to Graydon, and, having obtained a morning paper,
was at once absorbed in its contents.

"He does not appear like a baffled suitor who has enjoyed only a veiled tolerance," was Graydon's
thought. "Things will come out all right in the end, I suppose, but they certainly are not
proceeding as I expected. Stella will be mine eventually--it were treason to think otherwise--but
she is carrying it off rather boldly to keep Arnault so complacent at the same time. As far
as Madge is concerned, I've been a fool and made a mess of it. How in the mischief has she
been able to divine my very thoughts! She is wrong in one respect, however. If she had felt
and acted toward me like a sister I would have been loyal to her, and would have compelled
even Miss Wildmere to recognize her rights. I am not so far gone but that I can act in a straightforward,
honorable way. My acceptance of her action was an afterthought, a philosophical way I have
of making the best of everything. I now believe that it has turned out for the best, but I
have been guilty of no coldblooded calculation. Very well, I'll treat her as a simple, natural
girl and my very good friend, and see how this course works. Not that she is a simple girl.
I've met too many of that kind, and of those also who enshroud themselves in a cloud of little
feminine mysteries, all transparent enough to one of experience; but Madge does puzzle me.
She has not explained herself with her fine burst of indignation. Jove! how handsome she was!
She ever gives the impression that there is something back of all she says and does. Even Henry
feels it in his dim way, but that lightning flash made it clear that it is something of which
she need not be ashamed. Since she has learned to read me so understandingly, I will try to
fathom her thoughts. Perhaps friendship does mean more to her than to others. If so, I'll be
as true a friend to her as she to me. If I grant Stella such broad privileges with Arnault,
she must admit mine with one of whom it would be absurd to be jealous;" and, with cogitations
like the above, he also pretended to read his paper, and finished his cigar.

CHAPTER XVII

NOT STRONG IN VAIN

Graydon dreaded embarrassment when meeting Madge at dinner, but was agreeably disappointed.
There was nothing in the young girl's manner which suggested a vexed consciousness of their
recent interview, neither were there covert overtures, even in tones, toward more friendly
relations. He saw that if any were made he must make them. Madge was merely too well bred to
show anger in public, or occasion surmises that would require explanations. During the meal
she spoke of missing her horseback exercise, and said that she meant to ask Dr. Sommers if
he did not know of a good animal that might be hired for a few weeks. Graydon at once resolved
to make a propitiatory offering, and to go out with Madge when Miss Wildmere was unattainable.
For the time he was content to imitate Madge's tactics, and acted as if he intended to follow
the course that she had suggested. The fact that Arnault was so evidently enjoying his dinner
and the Wildmere smiles did not detract from his purpose to prove that he also was not without
resources. Moreover, he felt that he had not treated Madge fairly; he had been truly fond of
her, and now was conscious of a growing respect. As she had said, it was not a little thing
that she had attempted and accomplished, and there had been small ground for his discontent.
After dinner, however, he found a chance to ensconce himself by Miss Wildmere on the piazza,
and he was fully resolved to lose no such opportunities.

Madge, with the Muir children, passed him on the way to a small lake on which she had promised
to give the little people a row. He took off his hat in cordial courtesy, and she recognized
him with a brief smile, in which Miss Wildmere could detect no apprehension.

"I hope that 'sister Madge,' as you call her, does not resent my enjoyment of your society."

"Not in the least. I feel, however, that I have been neglecting her shamefully, and propose
to make amends."

"Indeed; has she brought you to a sense of your shortcomings? This scarcely bears out your
first remark."

"It is nothing against its truth. Miss Aldeu makes it very clear that she is not dependent
on me or any one for enjoyment; but in view of the past I have been scarcely courteous. Therefore,"
he added, with a laugh, "when Arnault monopolizes you I shall console myself with Madge."

"And therefore I shall feel the less compunction. Thank you."

"I am glad to take the least thorn from the roses of your life," was his smiling answer.

She veiled close scrutiny under her reply: "I fear the brilliant Miss Alden will cause my society
to appear commonplace in contrast."

"I do not see how you can fear anything of the kind," was his prompt answer; "I trust you,
and you must trust me."

"I do trust you, Mr. Muir," she said, softly.

Before he could speak again nurses and children came streaming and screaming from the lake
toward the house. "Nellie Wilder is drowned," was the burden of their dire message.

Graydon sprang down the steps, and rushed with the fleetness of the wind toward the lake.

As Madge, with Jennie and Harry Muir, approached the water, they saw a party of children playing
carelessly in a boat, and a moment later a little girl fell overboard. The boat was in motion
toward the shore, and when she rose it had passed beyond her reach. Her companions gave way
to wild panic, and, instead of trying to save her, screamed and pulled for land. No one was
present except nurses and other children, and they all joined in the wild, helpless chorus
of alarm, and began a stampede toward the hotel.

Madge saw that if the child was saved she must act promptly and wisely. To the Muir children
she said, authoritatively, "Sit down where you are and don't move." Then she rushed forward
and unfastened a skiff. As she did so the child rose for the last time and sunk again with
a gurgling cry. Keeping her eyes fixed on the spot, and with an oar in her hand, Madge pushed
away from the shore vigorously with her feet, and with the impetus sprang upon the narrow stern-sheets,
then crept forward toward the bow, at the same time ever keeping her eyes fixed unwaveringly
on the spot where the child had sunk, from which widening circles were eddying. The nurses
and children who had not started for the house, seeing that a rescue was attempted, looked
on with breathless dread and suspense.

When the impetus that Madge had first given to the skiff ceased, she kept the little craft
in motion by paddling, first on one side, then on the other, her eyes still fixed on one point
in the dark water. At last this point seemed almost beneath her; she dropped the oar, stooped,
and peered over the side of the boat. After a moment's hesitation she appeared to those on
shore to have lost her balance, fallen overboard, and sunk. Renewed screams of terror resounded,
and the Muir children fled toward the hotel, crying, "Aunt Madge is drowned."

"What do you mean?" Graydon gasped, seizing Harry by the arm.

"Oh, Uncle Graydon! run quick. Aunt Madge fell out of a boat under water."

A moment later he saw the young girl rise to the surface with a child in her grasp. With one
headlong plunge, and a few strong strokes, he was at her side, exclaiming, "Great God, Madge!
what does this mean?"

"Take her to the shore, quick; no matter about me;" and she pushed the limp and apparently
lifeless form into his arms.

"But, Madge--" he began.

"Haste! haste! and the child may be saved. Don't think of me; I can swim as well as you;" and
she struck out toward the shore.

Wondering and thrilled with admiration, in spite of the confusion of his thoughts, he did as
directed, and took the child to land at once.

Madge was there as soon as he, crying, even before she left the water, "Run for Dr. Sommers,
and if not at home ride after him."

Meanwhile gentlemen and employés of the house were arriving, and some turned back in search
of the physician.

The awful tidings had come upon poor Mrs. Wilder, the mother of the child, like a bolt out
of a clear sky, and she had run screaming and moaning toward the scene of disaster. Mother
love had given her almost superhuman strength; but when she saw the pale little face on the
ground, with the hue of death upon it, she crouched beside it in speechless agony, and watched
the efforts that were made to bring back consciousness.

Madge led and directed these efforts. In truth, she did as much to save the child on land as
when it had lain submerged on the muddy bottom of the pond. Graydon, seeing that she was coming
up the bank, had paused a moment irresolutely, and then was about to start for the hotel with
his burden. Madge caught his arm, and took the child from him.

"Graydon, take off your coat and give it to me," she said, imperatively, as she laid the child
down on its back; "your handkerchief, also," she added.

She forced open the pale lips, and wiped out the mouth with marvellous celerity, paying no
heed to the clamorous voices around her. "Some one give me a sharp knife," she cried, "and
don't crowd so near."

Lifting the child's clothing at the throat, she cut it down ward to the waist, then down each
arm, leaving the lovely little form exposed and free. Dropping the knife, she next rolled the
coat into a bundle, turned the child over so that her abdomen should rest upon it; then with
hands pressed rather strongly on each side of the little back, Madge sought to expel the water
that might have been swallowed. Turning the child over on her back again, the bundle made by
the coat was placed under the small of her back, so as to raise the chest. Then, catching the
little tongue that had awakened merry echoes but a few moments before, she drew it out of the
mouth to one side by the aid of the handkerchief, and said to Graydon, "Hold it, so."

All now saw that they were witnessing skilled efforts. Discordant advice ceased, and they looked
on with breathless interest.

"Has any one smelling salts?" Madge asked. There was no response. She snatched a bit of grass
and tickled the child's nose, saying, at the same time, "Bring water." This, after a few seconds,
she dashed over the face and exposed chest, waited an instant, then gave her patient a slap
over the pit of the stomach.

Graydon, kneeling before her, looked on with silent amazement. Her glorious eyes shone with
an absorbed and merciful purpose; she was oblivious of her own strange appearance, the masses
of her loosening hair falling over and veiling the lovely form outlined clearly by the wet
and clinging drapery of her summer dress. Others looked on in wonder, too, and with a respect
akin to awe. Among them were her sister and Henry Muir, Mr. Arnault, and Miss Wildmere--her
feelings divided between envy and commiseration for the child and its stricken mother.

These first simple efforts having no apparent effect, Madge said, quietly, "We must try artificial
respiration. Move a little more to one side, Graydon."

Kneeling behind the child, she lifted the little arms quickly but steadily up, over and down,
until they lay upon the ground behind the wet golden curls. This motion drew the ribs up, expanded
the chest and permitted air to enter it. After two or three seconds Madge reversed the motion
and pressed the arms firmly against the chest, to expel the air. This alternate motion was
kept up regularly at about the rate of sixteen times a minute, until the sound of a galloping
horse was heard, and the crowd parted for Dr. Sommers. He took in the situation with his quick
eye, and said, "Miss Alden, let me take your place."

"Oh, thank God, you are here!" she exclaimed. "Let me hold her tongue, Graydon; I must do something."

"Yes, Mr. Muir," added the physician; "let her help me; she knows just what to do. How long
was the child under water?"

"I don't know exactly; not long."

"Not more than four or five minutes?"

"I think not."

"There should be hope, then."

"We must save her!" cried Madge. "I once saw people work over an hour before there were signs
of life."

"Oh, God bless your brave heart!" murmured the poor mother. "You won't leave my child--you
won't let them give her up, will you?"

"No, Mrs. Wilder, not for one hour or two. I believe that your little girl will be saved."

"Have some brandy ready," said Dr. Sommers.

A flask was produced, and Graydon again knelt near, to have it in readiness, while the doctor
kept up his monotonous effort, pressing the arms against the lungs, then lifting them above
the head and back to the ground, with regular and mechanical iteration.

The child's eyelids began to tremble. "Ah!" exclaimed the doctor; a moment later there was
a slight choking cough, and a glad cry went up from the throng.

"The brandy," said the doctor.

Madge now gave up the case to him and Graydon, and slipped down beside the mother, who was
swaying from side to side. "Don't faint," she said; "your child will need you as soon as she
is conscious."

"Oh, Heaven bless you! Heaven bless you!" cried the mother; "you have saved my only, my darling."

"Yes, madam, you are right. It's all plain sailing now," the doctor added.

Then Madge became guilty of her first useless act. In strong revulsion she fainted dead away.
In a moment her head was on Mrs. Muir's lap, and Henry Muir was at her side.

"Poor girl! no wonder. There's not a woman in a hundred thousand who could do what she has
done. There, don't worry about her. Put her in my carriage with Mrs. Muir, and take her to
her room; I'll be there soon. She'll come out all right; such girls always do."

Meanwhile Mr. Muir and Graydon were carrying out the doctor's directions, and the unconscious
girl was borne rapidly to her apartment, where, under her sister's ministrations, she soon revived.

Almost her first conscious words, after being assured that the child was safe, were, "Oh, Mary!
what a guy I must have appeared! What will Graydon--I mean all who saw me--think?"

"They'll think things that might well turn any girl's head. As for Graydon, he is waiting outside
now, half crazy with anxiety to receive a message from you."

"Tell him I made a fool of myself, and he must not speak about it again on the pain of my displeasure."

"Well, you have come to," said Mrs. Muir, and then she went and laughingly delivered the message
verbatim, adding, "Go and put on dry clothes. You'll catch your death with those wet things
on, and you look like a scarecrow."

He departed, more puzzled over Madge Alden than ever, but admitting to himself that she had
earned the right to be anything she pleased.

Dr. Sommers continued his efforts in behalf of the little girl, chafing her wrists and body
with the brandy, and occasionally giving a few drops until circulation was well restored; and
then, at her mother's side, carried the child to her room, and gave directions to those who
were waiting to assist.

When he entered Madge's apartment, she greeted him with the words, "What a silly thing I did!"

"Not at all, not at all. You made your exit gracefully, and escaped the plaudits which a brave
girl like you wouldn't enjoy. I take off my hat to you, as we country-folks say. You are a
heroine--as good a doctor as I on shore and a better one in the water. Where did you learn it all?"

"Nonsense!" said Madge, "nothing would vex me more than to have a time made over the affair.
It's all as simple as a, b, c. What's that little pond to one who has been used to swimming
in the Pacific! As I said, I saw a girl restored once, and Mr. Wayland has explained to me
again and again just what to do."

"Oh, yes, it's all simple enough if you know how, but that's just the trouble. In all that
crowd I don't believe there was one who would not have done the wrong thing. Well, well, I
can manage now if I'm obeyed. You've had a good deal of a shock, and you must keep quiet till
to-morrow. Then I'll see."

Madge laughingly protested that nothing would please her better than a good supper and a good
book. "Please give out also," she said, "that any reference to the affair will have a very
injurious influence on me."

In spite of the doctor, messages and flowers poured in. At last Mrs. Wilder came and said to
Mrs. Muir, "I must see her, if it is safe."

"It's safe enough," Mrs. Muir began, "only Madge doesn't like so much made of it."

"I won't say much," pleaded the mother. She did not say anything, but put her arms around Madge
and pressed her tear-stained face upon the young girl's bosom in long, passionate embrace,
the hastened back to her restored treasure, who was sleeping quietly. Madge's eyes were wet
also, and she turned her face to the wall and breathed softly to herself, "Whatever happens
now--and it's plain enough what will happen--I did not get strong in vain. Graydon can never
think me altogether weak and lackadaisical again, and I have saved one woman's heart from anguish,
however my own may ache."

CHAPTER XVIII

MAKE YOUR TERMS

Graydon's uppermost thought now was to make his peace with Madge. He dismissed all his former
theories about her as absurd, and felt that, whether he understood her or not, she had become
a splendid woman, of whose friendship he might well be proud, and accept it on any terms that
pleased her. He also was sure that Miss Wildmere's prejudices would be banished at once and
forever by Madge's heroism, believing that the girl's hostile feeling was due only to the natural
jealousy of social rivals. "If Stella does not regard Madge's action with generous enthusiasm,
I shall think the worse of her," was his masculine conclusion.

The wily girl was not so obtuse as to be unaware of this, and when he came down she said all
he could wish in praise of Madge, but took pains to enlarge upon his own courage. At this he
pooh-poohed emphatically. "What was that duck-pond of a lake to a man!" he said. "Madge herself
has become an expert ocean-swimmer, I am told. She wasn't afraid of the water. It was her skill
in finding the child beneath it, and in resuscitation afterward, that chiefly commands my admiration."

"Oh, dear!" cried the girl, "what can I do to command your admiration?"

"You know well, Miss Wildmere, that you command much more."

She blushed, smiled, and looked around a little apprehensively.

"Don't be alarmed," he added; "I have such confidence in you that I will bide your time."

"Thank you, Graydon," she whispered, and hastened away, leaving him supremely happy. It was
the first time she had called him "Graydon."

Seeing Dr. Sommers emerging from the hotel, he hastened after him, bent on procuring a peace-offering
for Madge--the finest horse that could be had in the region.

"I know of one a few miles from here," said the doctor. "He's a splendid animal, but a high
and mighty stepper. I don't believe that even she could manage him."

"I'll break him in for her, never fear. Of course I won't let her take any risks."

"Well, leave it to me, then. I can manage it. He's awfully headstrong, though. I give you fair
warning."

"Take me to see him as soon as you can; the horse, I mean, or, rather, both man and horse."

"To-morrow morning, then. I have patients out that way."

At supper and during the evening Madge and her exploit were the themes of conversation. Some
tried to give Graydon a part of the credit, but he laughed so contemptuously at the idea that
he was let alone. Henry Muir did not say much, but looked a great deal, and with Graydon listened
attentively as his wife explained how it was that Madge had proved equal to the emergency.

"Why don't more people follow her example?" said the practical man, "and learn how to do something
definite? As she explains the rescue, there was nothing remarkable in it. If she could swim
and dive in the ocean for sport, she would not be much afraid to do the same in that so-called
lake, to save life. As to her action on shore, the knowledge she used is given in books and
manuals. What's more, she had seen it done. But most people are so pointless and shiftless
that they never know just what to do in an emergency, no matter what their opportunities for
information may have been."

"Now you hit me," Graydon remarked, ruefully, "Left to myself I should have finished the young
one, for I was about to run to the hotel with her, a course that I now see would have been
as fatal as idiotic."

"Madge says," Mrs. Muir continued, "that they used to bathe a great deal, and that Mr. Wayland
explained just what should be done in all the possible emergencies of their outdoor life at
Santa Barbara."

"Wayland in a level-headed man. If he is bookish, he's not a dreamer with his head in the clouds.
Madge was in good hands with them, and proves it every day."

"I think she shows the influence of Mrs. Wayland even more than that of her husband. Fanny
is a very accomplished woman, and saw a great deal of society in her younger days."

"Confound it all! Why didn't you tell me that Madge had been living with two paragons?" said
Graydon.

"Oh, you have been so occupied with another paragon that there has not been much chance to
tell you anything," was Mrs. Muir's consoling reply.

"Madge has not been made what she is by paragons," Mr. Muir remarked, dryly. "She made herself.
They only helped her, and couldn't have helped a silly woman."

"It's time you were jealous, Mary," said Graydon, laughing.

"Mary isn't a silly woman. I should hope that no Muir would marry one."

"I see no prospect of it," was the rather cold reply.

"I fear I see a worse prospect," was his brother's thought. "Of what use are his eyes or senses
after what he has seen to-day?"

Mrs. Muir had explained to some lady friends about Madge, and the information was passing into
general circulation--the ladies rapidly coming to the conclusion that the young girl's action
was not so remarkable after all, which was true enough. The men, however, retained their enthusiastic
admiration, although it must be admitted that its inspiration was due largely to Madge's beauty.

"Of course women have done braver things," said one man, with sporting tendencies, "but it
was the neat, gamy way in which she did it that took my eye. Her method was as complete and
rounded out as herself. Jove! as she bent over that child she was a nymph that would turn the
head of a Greek."

"She has evidently turned the head of a Cyprian," laughed one of his friends.

"Come, that's putting it too strong," said the man, with a frown. "I'll affect no airs, though.
I'm not a saint, as you all know, but the aspect of that girl, in her self-forgetful effort,
might well make me wish I were one. She is as good and pure-hearted as the child she saved.
If there had been a flaw in the white marble of her nature she would have been self-conscious.
An angel from heaven couldn't have been more absorbed in the one impulse to save."

Graydon had approached the group unobserved, and heard these words. He walked away, smiling,
with the thought, "My sentiments, clearly expressed."

The night was warm, and he saw Miss Wildmere and Arnault going out for a stroll. Following
a half-defined inclination, he bent his steps toward the lake. The moon was mirrored in its
glassy surface, the place silent and deserted. With slight effort of fancy he called up the
scene again. He saw in the moonlight the fairy form of the child, and what even others had
regarded as the embodiment of human loveliness and truth bending over it.

"And she was the little ghost that once haunted me," he thought, "and seemed all eyes and affection.
How those eyes used to welcome and turn to me, as if in some subtle way she drew from me the
power to exist at all. I wish I could follow the processes of her change from the hour of our
parting, and see how I passed from what I was to her to what I am now. I have rarely, if ever,
seen in any part of the world so fascinating an assemblage of all that would render a country
party agreeable as was here collected in one of the most out-of-the-way corners of Ireland. My worthy
captain's advice was now thrown to the winds; and indeed any heart, aged twenty-two, must have
been made of cast-iron to have resisted the rides and walks, the picnic dinners, the dances,
and the music parties, and suppers, besides the infinitely varied round of other amusements, grave
and gay, which contributed to render, and will for ever preserve, this nook of Ireland the true
terrestrial paradise of my early days.

How the deuce I ever contrived to get out of the magic circle, I hardly know; but if I could
only feel myself at liberty, without a breach of confidence, to give a few details of those hours,
I would stake great odds on the side of the effect which the description of such a reality
might produce, against the interest of the imaginary scenes in almost any romance.

I have already mentioned that the gentleman whose introduction I carried was most urgent for me
to deliver the letter in person; but he gave no reasons for this anxiety; nor indeed was I
then aware, that, besides his being an intimate friend, he was their family physician. While
acting in this capacity, he had seen with regret how ineffectual his art had proved to alleviate
the mother's sorrow caused by the recent loss of her favourite son.

The young man had been in the Navy, and would have been about my own age and standing in the service.
These accidental coincidences suggested to her judicious and kind-hearted friend, that as
I, in some degree, resembled him in appearance and in manners, the
poor mother's thoughts and feelings might possibly be diverted into
a new channel, by the society of a person in so many respects similarly
circumstanced to the child she had lost.

It so happened, fortunately for me, that the experiment completely
succeeded--I hope and believe, to the mother's consolation.

To me, of course, the reception I met with was matter of delight
and astonishment; so much so, indeed, that I occasionally felt somewhat
startled, and almost oppressed, with the sense of obligation imposed
by such unusual and unmerited attentions.

The first explanation of the mystery is really so touching in itself, that I give it without
reserve as I received it in a letter from this most excellent old
lady, about six months after my first acquaintance with her, and just
before I quitted England for the East Indies:--

"Once more adieu!"

She concludes, "I must hope you will write to me often; let me constantly know how you proceed,
and how I can address you; and recollect, you have received the freedom
of this house.

I believe I told you I had lost a son, a lieutenant in the Navy, and of superior talents. I
therefore consider that Heaven has given you to my care in his place--and
may the Almighty protect you!"

CHAPTER III.

TRICKS UPON TRAVELLERS.

A curious and vastly pleasing fashion prevails in that part of Ireland
where I was so nearly bewitched as almost to forget my ship, my duties,
and everything else, but beauty!

When a party, such as I have been describing, had passed a certain time together, they seldom broke
up entirely, but generally shifted, or emigrated in a body (flitted,
I think they used to call it) to the house of some one of their number.

Now and then various members of the group dropped off by the way,
but their places were presently filled up by others, who soon found
their way to the new hive when the well-known sounds of festivity
were heard in the neighbourhood.

In this manner the party, into which I had been so kindly admitted,
made several moves, with sundry losses and accessions to its numbers;
and as every day rendered this life more and more grateful, I could
scarcely bear to think of returning to the tame occupations and rugged
society of the frigate, the duties of which had so recently been my
greatest and most sincere delight.

Meanwhile, since my good-natured captain, and still better-natured
messmates, made no difficulties about this protracted absenteeism,
I continued to involve myself deeper and deeper at every step.

I failed not to perceive at times that I was getting into rather a dangerous scrape for a younger
son and a young officer, who had yet to work his own way in the world.

But as these reflections interfered rather impertinently with the enjoyments of the hour, they
were crushed down, and kept out of sight as much as possible at that
gay period.

What surprised me most, all this time, was the air of refinement and high polish in the Irish
society amongst which I was thus casually thrown. I had previously entertained an idea that their
hospitality, proverbial in all parts of the world, was of a rude
and rather troublesome description.

I found it, on the contrary, marked not only by the strongest lines of sincerity and kindness,
but by many of those delicate touches of consideration for the feelings
of others which form the most indubitable symptoms of genuine good-breeding.

Instead

of discovering that the stories were true about the sort of compulsion used in matters of drinking,
I can safely say that, during the course of experience in joviality
I went through in the north of Ireland, I seldom met with anything
at a gentleman's table approaching even to exigence on this score.

I do not deny that our friends the Irish have a wonderfully winning way of insinuating their
good cheer upon us, and sometimes of inducing us to swallow more claret than is perhaps good for
us.

I landed once at Burncrana, a pretty quiet little village, with a watering-place look, on the
eastern banks of that great and beautiful bay Lough Swilly. One side of this fine harbour
is formed by the bold promontory of Inishowen, celebrated in every
land for its noble whiskey, second only (which, as a Scotchman, I
am bound to assert) to Ferntosh or Glenlivet.

I was accompanied by an English gentleman, on the first day of his
landing in Ireland.

As he then seriously imagined the inhabitants to belong to a sort of wild and uncouth race,
I could see he was rather surprised at the gentleman-like deportment of an acquaintance of mine
resident on the spot, for whom he had brought a letter.

We had walked together to his house, or rather cottage, for he was not a fixed resident, but
came there for summer quarters.

The neatness, and even elegance, of the domestic arrangements of his temporary establishment,
both without and within the dwelling, gave token of a taste many degrees removed from the state
of people far back in civilization. Presently the ladies came; and their national frankness, modified
by the most entire and unaffected simplicity, puzzled my friend completely.

In due season the dressing-bell sent us off to prepare for dinner; and while we were getting ready, my
companion said, "I see what this fellow is at: he means to sew you and me up. You may do as you
please; but I'll be shot if he plays off his Irish pranks on me. I will eat his dinner, take a
couple of glasses of his wine, make my bow to the ladies, go on board by eight or nine o'clock,
and, having given them a dinner in return, shall have done my duty in the way of attention; after
which I shall totally cut the connection.

I have no idea of their abominable fashion of forcing strangers to
drink."

"We shall see," said I; and having knocked the dust off our shoes, down we went to dinner.

Everything was plain, and suitable to the pretensions of a cottage.

There was no pressing to eat or drink during dinner; and in process of time the cloth was removed,
the Ladies sipped a little sweet wine, and disappeared.

"Now for it," whispered my friend; "he has sent the women out of the
way, that he may ply us the better."

And I must own things looked rather suspicious; for our host, instead
of sitting down again at the dinner-table, walked to a bow-window
overlooking the anchorage, and exactly facing the setting sun, at
that hour illuminating the whole landscape in the gorgeous style peculiar
to combined mountain and lake scenery.

"Why should we not enjoy this pleasant prospect while we are discussing
our wine?" said the master of the house.

At that instant the door opened, and in walked the servant, as if he knew by intuition what
was passing in his master's head.

"Tim," said our host, "put the card-table here in the bow-window, and give us some other glasses;
also, if you have such a thing, bring up a bottle of claret."

Tim nodded, smiled, and made the fitting adjustments. The table was barely large enough to
hold a noble long-corked bottle, for the fashion of claret decanters had not as yet reached
that remote district of the empire.

Round the margin was placed the necessary accompaniment of capacious glasses--famous tall fellows,
with such slender stalks that they seemed scarcely equal to the weight
of their generous load.

My friend and I exchanged glances, and I could see his shoulders slightly
raised, as if he was saying internally, "Now we are in for it! but
I will not drink a drop more than I choose."

The claret, which in itself was most delicious, was cooled in perfect
style.

The party consisted, I think, of four or five persons, and this one bottle, I remember, just passed
round the group twice. As the flavour of the beverage appeared to have become more exquisite
at the second turn than at the first, though but a short interval had been allowed to elapse,
it seemed odd that another bottle was not instantly called for. Instead of this our landlord went
on expatiating on the beauties of the Lough, and the fineness of the season in general, and the
sunset in particular, for full five minutes after the wine had disappeared; when he suddenly
said, with a half-hesitating tone, towards my English friend, who sat at his elbow----

"I beg your pardon! perhaps you would take some more wine?"

As no one made any objection, the bell was rung, and Tim re-appeared, bearing with him another
bottle. This likewise vanished in a trice, and Tim was again summoned. "Bring some more claret,"
said the master to the man, or rather boy, as he was called, though twice as old as any of
the party.

At this instant I caught my companion's eye; and I could see he was becoming alive to the plot
against him, so much so, indeed, that he seemed to be preparing to
rise.

The following conversation, however, attracted his attention, and fixed him to his seat. "Well,
Tim, what are you gaping at?

Why don't you run for the clar't?"

"I didn't know," replied the other, "whether you'd like to use the
whole of it."

"Use the whole of it!" exclaimed his master--"what does the boy mean? Why, Tim, what are you at?"

"Oh,
sir," quoth the well-instructed rogue, "as the wine you brought was
but little, I thought you might not wish to use it all entirely to-day."

And then he whispered something in his master's ear, the words of which we could not distinguish.
The reply, however, showed, or seemed to show, what had been said.

"Nonsense, Tim, nonsense! you're an ass, man; bring it up."

Tim accordingly disappeared, but soon returned with a basket apparently full of straw; at the
bottom of which, however, after some considerable show of hunting,
a couple of bottles were said to be found.

"Confound you, Tim, is this all?" said the host.

"It is, sir," lied Tim; "and in faith, sir," added he, still lying,
"it's one more bottle than I thought; for there was but a dozen when
we started from Derry a week ago; and you know, sir, you and the collector
on last Tuesday"

But the catalogue of circumstances which were intended to act as buttresses to Master Tim's inventions
was cut short by a peremptory order to leave the room. This he did so soon as he had made a
circumbendibus to escape notice, and deposited the basket behind
his master's chair, muttering, as he put it down with a thump, "There's
a couple of bottles of as good wine as ever was uncorked."

The fresh broach was indeed so delicious that we could hardly believe
it was of the same vintage as that of the previous bin, though our
host assured us it was "the identical."

Tim's basket well merited a higher eulogium than he had given it;
but while his reputation as a judge of wine rose, his character for
veracity fell in about the same proportion, since we beheld, in due
season, not merely two, but three, and at last a fourth long-necked
gentleman from Bordeaux emerge from under the straw!

The trick played upon us by these confederates was now apparent enough; but the wine, fortunately,
was of that light and pure kind which does not produce much effect
on strong heads, and that of my companion was proof against far greater
trials than this.

He was indeed perfectly aware of what was passing; and though dearly
loving the wine, which was superior to any he had ever before tasted,
yet he had no notion of being made tipsy by means of a common-place
concert between host and butler.

He therefore rose to leave the room, expecting, of course, to be
forcibly detained, or, at all events, being begged and entreated to
sit down again.

Not a whit! The wily native merely observed to him that "if he had a mind to admire the prospect,
there was still daylight enough to command a view down the bay from the little knoll on the right."
The Englishman was sorely puzzled by all this.

There was none of the detention he expected would be practised upon
him, and yet he had a strong consciousness that he was undergoing
the operation well known afloat and ashore by the title of "the game
of humbug."

At the same time, he felt the most eager desire to take another good pull at the claret.

There was no wine before us at this critical juncture of the evening, and our landlord, who,
most unaccountably, seemed indifferent to this material circumstance,
went on prosing for a quarter-of-an-hour about Protestant ascendancy,
the eternal siege of Derry, the battle of the Boyne, and such like
stale topics.

At length one of the company became somewhat impatient, and, watching for a pause, asked his
host if it were the custom in Ireland to discuss Orange politics with empty glasses?

"God bless me," cried the other, with well-feigned surprise, "is there no wine on the table?" and
ringing the bell furiously, scolded poor Tim so naturally that the
confederate was almost thrown out.

"Well! you numskull, why don't you make off with you, and bring something for the gentlemen
to drink?" Tim stood fast till interrogated a second time, and then
replied with perfect gravity that "there wasn't another drop of wine
in the house."

Upon this the master got up in a rage, and brushing past the servant, declared his intention of
searching the cellar himself.

He was absent some time, and we had just prevailed on our hesitating companion to sit down
again, when, as if there had been some electrical communication between
his chair and the handle of the door, it opened, and in walked our
generous entertainer, exulting in his success, crowing like chanticleer,
and bearing in each hand a couple of bottles, clicking against each
other; while Tim, with a degree of impudence equalled only by that
of his master, substituted clean glasses, of a still more capacious
swallow than the first.

To these were added two pair of candles which towered high above
the jolly crew, and promised to last till another dawn should look
in upon our revels.

By this time the twilight had almost entirely ebbed away, and was
succeeded by that cheerful, aurora-kind of brilliancy in the sky,
which points out the place of the sun during the whole of his summer
night's journey in those high latitudes.

Politics dropped, for the joyous juice of the grape soon melted us
all into one mind; and a hundred topics of more pleasing interest
were started, in which the strangers could join without fear of any
angry discussion.

The mirth and animation of the company rose very pleasantly as each fresh bottle found its way
by some magical process to the table. But it became rather difficult to tell who were the listeners
amongst us, or to say who was guest and who landlord, for the party seemed like a circle of
brothers, all equally at home.

This went on for an indefinite length of time, but I should be the
veriest conjuror on earth to say how long.

Through the hazy atmosphere of my recollection of that jolly evening,
I remember that about eleven o'clock, more or less, our host was enchanted
almost beyond the power of words by seeing his wine so much relished,
and tickled also with the success of his joke, in making his suspicious
guest drink just as much wine as he thought fit to impose.

On this occasion, however, he inverted the proverb, and reckoned without his guest; for, by one
imprudent remark, he had well-nigh torn the laurels from his brow.

"Well, sir!" he exclaimed, "although this is the first day you ever set foot on the island, you
have seen enough, I hope, to satisfy you that we are not quite such savages as you supposed;
liberty hall, you see, is the true title of every Irish gentleman's dining-room: there's no compulsion
here, you must see very clearly." It was little that my English friend could now see very clearly
of anything; but the above premature announcement of victory brought
back all the stranger's suspicions.

Fired with this idea, he started on his feet, and eyeing the door
for a long time before he ventured on the voyage, with a bold determination,
and taking a good departure from his chair, he gained his port.

He had undoubtedly expected to be lugged back again; for he whisked the tails of his coat out
of reach, while, with his other hand on the lock of the door, and swaying himself about from
side to side, like a ship in a calm, he stood the very image of tottering equilibrium, as the
mathematicians call it. Our adroit landlord, who was not a man to shrink from difficulties,
mustered to his aid all the resources of a long well-practised hospitality,
and gallantly met this great occasion.

His devices were, probably, exhausted; so he took another line, and called out, "Oh, you're
off, are you? Very well--you'll find the ladies in the drawing-room.

I think I hear the tinkle of the piano: I prefer the tinkle of the glass. Pray tell the damsels
we are coming by-and-bye: mind you say 'by-and-bye.' I don't like to be too particular, for fear
of seeming rude: don't you see?"

This speech was wound up by a telegraphic flourish of the hand towards Tim, who stood near, with
a bottle between his feet, the screw buried in the cork, and his body bent to the effort,
which he only delayed to exercise till ordered by his master to pull.

"Out with him, man! out with the cork!" cried the host.

The loud report which succeeded rang over the apartment like the
sweetest music to the souls of the ever thirsty company.

Tim's thunder was echoed back by a truly bacchanalian shout, such as nothing on earth can give
proper emphasis to, except a double allowance of claret.
 With all her impulsive ways
she's as deep as perdition, and she'd flirt with him to spite me, if nothing more. Papa said
last night that I had better accept Arnault. I won't accept him till I must, and he'll rue
his success if he wins it." Then the mirror reflected a lovely creature dissolved in tears.

Again she soliloquized: "I can't accept a horse from Graydon; Arnault would never submit to
it. The receiving of such a present would compromise me at once. It does not matter so much
what I say or look in private; this proves nothing to the world, and I see more and more clearly
that Arnault will not permit his pride to be humiliated. He will endure what he calls a fair,
open suit philosophically, but the expression of his eyes makes me shiver sometimes. Was ever
a girl placed in such a mean and horrible position! I won't endure this shilly-shally much
longer. If they can't prove something more definite against the Muirs, I'll accept Graydon.
Papa is just horrid! Why can't he make more in Wall Street? There must be ways, and any way
is as respectable as the one I may be compelled to take. Well, if I do have to accept Arnault
I'll make Graydon think that I had to do so for papa's sake, and we'll become good friends
again before long. Perhaps this would be the best way in the end, for papa looked wildly, and
spoke of a tenement-house last night. Tenement! Great heavens! I'd sooner die."

CHAPTER XX

"VEILED WOOING"

"Graydon, when do you think I can have my first ride?" Madge asked at dinner, with sparkling eyes.

"At about five this afternoon. I have found a saddle that I can borrow in case yours does not
come till the late train."

"Oh, I'm so glad that I've lost my appetite! You can't know how much a horse means to me. It
was after I began to ride that I grew strong enough to hope."

"Why, Madge, were you so discouraged as that?" he asked, feelingly.

"I had reason to be discouraged," she replied, in a low tone. Then she threw back her head,
proudly. "You men little know," she continued, half defiantly. "You think weakness one of our
prerogatives, and like us almost the better for it. We are meekly to accept our fate, and from
soft couches lift our languid eyes in pious resignation. I won't do it; and when a powerful
horse is beneath me, carrying me like the wind, I feel that his strength is mine, and that
I need not succumb to feminine imbecility or helplessness in any form."

"Brava, Madge!" cried Henry Muir.

"You were born a knight," added Graydon, "and have already made more and better conquests than
many celebrated in prose and poetry."

"Oh, no," cried Madge, lifting her eyebrows in comic distress. "I was born a woman to my finger-tips,
and never could conquer even myself. I have an awful temper. Graydon, you have already found
that out."

"I have found that I had better accept just what you please to be, and fully admit your right
to be just what you please," he answered, ruefully.

"What a lovely and reasonable frame of mind!" Mrs. Muir remarked. "Truly, Miss Wildmere is
to be congratulated. You have only to stick to such a disposition, and peace will last longer
than the moon."

"Oh, Miss Wildmere will prove a rose without a thorn," Madge added, laughing, while under Mr.
Muir's eye her face paled perceptibly. "There will never be anything problematical in her single-minded
devotion. She has been well and discreetly brought up, and finished by the best society, while
poor me!--I had to fly in the face of fate like a virago, and scramble up the best I could
in Western wilds. Oh, well, Graydon, don't be alarmed. I'll be a good fellow if you'll take
me out riding occasionally."

He began to laugh, and she continued: "I saw you frown when I began my wicked speech. We'll
tick off tabooed subjects, and make an index expurgatorius, and then we'll get on famously."

"No need of that," he said. "As far as I am concerned, please consider me fair game."

"Consider you fair game?" she said, with her head archly on one side. "That would be arrant
poaching. Don't fear, Graydon, I shall never regard any man as game, not even if I should become
a fat dowager with a bevy of plain daughters and a dull market."

Grave and silent Mr. Muir leaned back in his chair and laughed so heartily that he attracted
attention at the Wildmere table across the room.

"That man doesn't act as if on the brink of failure," thought Miss Wildmere. "It's all a conspiracy
of Arnault with papa."

"You are making game of me in one sense very successfully," Graydon admitted, laughing a little
uneasily.

"Oh, in that sense, all men are legitimate game, and I shall chaff as many as possible, out
of spite that I was not a man."

"You would make a good one--you are so devoid of sentiment and so independent."

"And yet within a week I think a certain gentleman was inclined to think me sentimental, aesthetic,
intense, a victim of ideals and devotional rhapsodies."

"Oh, ye gods! Here, waiter, bring me my dessert, and let me escape," cried Graydon.

"Did you say I was to be ready at five?" she asked, sweetly.

"Yes, and bring down articles of a truce, and we'll sign them in red ink."

An hour later she heard the gallop of a horse, and saw him riding away. "She shan't mount the
animal," he had thought, "till I learn more about him and give him all the running he wants
to-day. She has a heavy enough score against me as it is, and I'll not employ another brute
to make things worse."

He learned more fully what he had discovered before, that she would have her hands full in
managing the horse, and he gave him a run that covered him with foam and tested his breathing.
At four he galloped back to the station to see if the saddle had arrived, but found that even
his skill and strength were not sufficient to make the animal approach the engine. Shouting
to the baggage-man to bring the expected articles to the stable, he was soon there and made
another experiment. A hostler brought him a blanket, which he strapped around his waist, and
mounted again in a lady's style. It was at once evident that the horse had never been ridden
by a woman. He reared, kicked, and plunged around frightfully, and Graydon had to clutch the
mane often to keep his seat. Madge had speedily joined him, and looked with absorbed interest,
at times laughing, and again imploring Graydon to dismount. This he at last he did, the perspiration
pouring from his face. Resigning the trembling and wearied horse to a stable-boy, he came toward
the young girl, mopping his brow and exclaiming: "It will never do at all. He is ugly as sin.
No woman should ride him, not even a squaw."

"Bah, Graydon! he did not throw you, although he had you at every disadvantage. I'm not in
the least afraid. Has the saddle come?"

"Yes; but I protest, Madge. Here, Dr. Sommers" (who was approaching), "lay your commands on
this rash girl."

"If Dr. Sommers says I'm rash he doesn't understand my case, and I refuse to employ him," cried
Madge. Then she added, sweetly: "If I break any bones, doctor, I'll be your very humble and
obedient servant. It's half-past four, and I'll be ready as soon as you are, Graydon. No backing
out. You might as well warn me against the peril of a rocking-chair;" and she went to put on
her habit.

"Heaven help us!" said Graydon to the doctor. "We're in a scrape. She's so resolute that I
believe she would go alone. What would you do? Hang it all! the people of the house have got
an inkling of what's up; some are gathering near, and the windows are full of heads."

"Put the saddle on one of the quiet livery horses, and you ride this brute," said the doctor.

"You don't know her. She wouldn't stand that at all."

"Then give her her head. After yesterday I believe she can do what she undertakes. You have
tired the horse out pretty thoroughly, and I guess she'll manage him."

Leaving orders to have Madge's horse sponged off and dried, and the best animal in the stable
prepared for himself, he said, "Well then, doctor, be on hand to repair damages," and went
to his room to change his dress.

The doctor did more. He saw that Madge's horse was saddled carefully, meanwhile admiring the
beautiful equipment that Graydon had ordered. He also insured that Graydon had a good mount.

When at last the young man tapped at Madge's door she came out looking most beautiful in her
close-fitting habit and low beaver, with its drooping feather. Mary followed her, protesting
and half crying, and Mr. Muir looked very grave.

"Madge," said Graydon, earnestly, "I should never forgive myself if any harm came to you. That
horse is not fit for you to ride."

"Good people, see here," said Madge, turning upon them; "I am not a reckless child, nor am
I making a rash experiment. Even if I did not fear broken bones, do you think I would give
you needless anxiety? Graydon has kindly obtained for me a fine horse, and I must make a beginning
to show you and him that I can ride. If Mr. and Mrs. Wayland were here they would laugh at
you. Don't come out to see me off, Mary. Others would follow, and I don't want to be conspicuous.
I do wish people would mind their own business."

"No danger of my coming out. I don't want to see you break your neck," cried Mary, re-entering
her room.

"You must let me go, Madge," said Mr. Muir, firmly. "I may have to interpose my authority."

"Yes, do come, for Heaven's sake!" said Graydon.

"Very well," laughed Madge. "If I once get on, you and the horse may both find it hard to get
me off. Where are the horses?" she asked, upon reaching the door.

"You must yield one point and mount near the stable," said Graydon, resolutely.

"Oh, certainly, I'll yield everything except my ride."

Madge's horse stood pawing the ground, showing how obdurate and untamable was his spirit. She
exclaimed at the beauty of the saddle and its housings, and said, "Thank you, Graydon," so
charmingly that he anathematized himself for giving her a brute instead of a horse. "I should
have satisfied myself better about him," he thought, "and have looked further."

In a moment she had the animal by the head, and was patting his neck, while he turned an eye
of fire down upon her, and showed no relenting in his chafed and excited mood. Graydon meanwhile
examined everything carefully, and saw that the bridle had a powerful curb.

"Well," said he, ruefully, "if you will, you will."

"Yes; in no other way can I satisfy you," was her quiet reply.

"Let us get away, then; spectators are gathering. You should be able to hold him with this
rein. Come."

She put her foot in his hand, and was mounted in a second, the reins well in hand. The horse
reared, but a sharp downward pull to the right brought him to his feet again. Then he plunged
and kicked, but she sat as if a part of him, meanwhile speaking to him in firm, gentle tones.
His next unexpected freak was to run backward in a way that sent the neighboring group flying.
Instantly Madge gave him a stinging blow over the hind quarters, and he fairly sprang into the air.

"Get off, Madge," cried Mr. Muir, authoritatively, but the horse was speeding down the road
toward the house, and Graydon, who had looked on breathlessly, followed. Before they reached
the hotel she had brought him up with the powerful curb, and prancing, curvetting, straining
side-wise first in one direction, then in the other, meanwhile trembling half with anger, half
with terror, the mastered brute passed the piazza with its admiring groups. Graydon was at
her side. He did not see Miss Wildmere frowning with vexation and envy, or Arnault's complacent
observance. With sternly compressed lips and steady eye he watched Madge, that, whatever emergency
occurred, he might do all that was possible. The young girl herself was a presence not soon
to be forgotten. Her lips were slightly parted, her eye glowing with a joyous sense of power,
and her pose, flexible to the eccentric motions of the horse, grace itself. They passed on
down the winding carriage-drive, out upon the main street, and then she turned, waved her handkerchief
to Mr. Muir, and with her companion galloped away.

Several of Mr. Muir's acquaintances came forward, offering congratulations, which he accepted
with his quiet smile, and then went up to reassure his wife, who, in spite of her words to
the contrary, had kept her eyes fastened upon Madge as long as she was in sight.

"Well," she exclaimed, "did you ever see anything equal to that?"

"No," said her husband, "but I have seen nothing wonderful or unnatural; she did not do a thing
that she had not been trained and taught to do, and all her acts were familiar by much usage."

"I think she's a prodigy," exclaimed Mrs. Muir.

"Nothing of the kind. She is a handsome girl, with good abilities, who has had the sense to
make the most and best of herself instead of dawdling."

After an easy gallop of a mile, in which Madge showed complete power to keep her horse from
breaking into a mad run, she drew rein and looked at Graydon with a smile. He took off his
hat and bowed, laughingly.

"Oh, Graydon," she said, "it was nice of you to let me have my own way!"

"I didn't do it very graciously. I have seldom been more worried in my life."

"I'm glad you were a little worried," she said. "It recalls your look and tone at the time
of our parting, when you said, 'Oh, Madge, do get well and strong!' Haven't I complied with
your wish?"

"Had my wish anything to do with your compliance?"

"Why not?"

"What an idiot I've been! I fear I have been misjudging you absurdly. I've had no end of ridiculous
thoughts and theories about you."

"Indeed! Apparently I had slight place in your thoughts at all, but I made great allowances
for a man in your condition."

"That was kind, but you were mistaken. Why, Madge, we were almost brought up together, and
I couldn't reconcile the past and the present. The years you spent in the far West, and their
result, are more wonderful than a fairytale. I wish you would tell me about them."

"I will. Friends should be reasonably frank. What's more, I wish to show you how natural and
probable the result, as you call it, has been. Your wondering perplexity vexes me. You know
what I was when we parted."

"No, I don't believe I do, or you couldn't be what you are now."

"Well, I can tell you: I had weak lungs, a weak body, and a weak, uncultured mind. I was weak
in all respects, but I discovered that I had a will, and I had sense enough, as Henry says,
to know that if I was ever going to be more than a ghost it was time I set about it. I knew
of Mrs. Wayland's restoration to health in the climate of Santa Barbara, and I determined to
try it myself. I couldn't have had better friends or advantages than the place afforded. But
oh, Graydon, I was so weak and used up when I reached there that I could scarcely do more than
breathe. But I had made up my mind either to get well or to die. I rested for days, until I
could make a beginning, and then, one step at a time, as it were, I went forward. Take two
things that you have seen me do, for example. One can bathe in the sea at Santa Barbara almost
throughout the year. At first I was as timid as a child, and scarcely dared to wet my feet;
but Mr. Wayland was a sensible instructor, and led me step by step. The water was usually still,
and I gradually acquired the absolute confidence of one who can swim, and swims almost every
day. So with a horse. I could hardly sit on one that was standing still, I was so weak and
frightened; but with muscle and health came stronger nerves and higher courage. After a few
months I thought nothing of a ten-mile gallop on the beach or out to the cañons. I took up
music in the same way, and had a thoroughly good teacher. He did the best he could for me,
which wasn't so very much. I never could become a scientist in anything, but I was determined
to be no sham within my limitations. I have tried to do some things as well as I could and
let the rest go. Now you see how easily I can explain myself, and I only seem wonderful because
of contrast with what I was."

"But where do I come in?" he asked, eagerly.

"Did you not say, 'Please get well and strong?' I thought it would gratify you and Mary and
Henry. You used to call me a ghost, and I did not want to be a ghost any longer. I saw that
you enjoyed your vigorous life fully, and felt that I might enjoy life also; and as I grew
strong I did enjoy everything more and more. Two things besides, and I can say, 'All present
or accounted for.' Mr. Wayland is a student, and has a splendid library. He coached me--that
was your old college jargon--on books, and Mrs. Wayland coached me on society. So here I am,
weighing a hundred and twenty pounds, more or less, and ready for another gallop;" and away
she went, the embodiment of beautiful life.

"One more question, Madge," he said, as they slackened pace again. "Why wouldn't you write
to me oftener?"

"I don't like to write letters. Mine to Mary were scarcely more than notes. Ask her. Are you
satisfied now? Am I a sphinx--a conundrum--any longer?"

"No; and at last I am more than content that you are not little Madge."

"Why, this is famous, as Dr. Sommers says. When was a man ever known to change his mind before?"

"I've changed mine so often of late that I'm fairly dizzy. You are setting me straight at last."

Madge laughed outright, and after a moment said, "Now account for yourself. What places did
you visit abroad?"

He began to tell her, and she to ask questions that surprised him, showing that she had some
idea of even the topography and color of the region, and a better knowledge of the history
and antiquities than himself. At last he expressed his wonder. "What nonsense!" she exclaimed.
"You don't remember the little I did write you. As I said before, did you not at my request--very
kindly and liberally, too, Graydon--send me books about the places you expected to see? A child
could have read them and so have gained the information that surprises you."

They talked on, one thing leading to another, until he had a conscious glow of mental excitement.
She knew so much that he knew, only in a different way, and her thoughts came rippling forth
in piquant, musical words. Her eyes were so often full of laughter that he saw that she was
happy, and he remembered after their return that she had not said an ill-natured word about
any one. It was another of their old-time, breezy talks, only larger, fuller, complete with
her rich womanhood. He found himself alive in every fibre of his body and faculty of his mind.

As they turned homeward the evening shadows were gathering, and at last the dusky twilight
passed into a soft radiance under the rays of the full-orbed moon. 

I don't know why. Perhaps it is to complete our view of the congregation, since during the rest
of the time we look the other way, and, unless we faced about, should see only half. I like
to peep at father, to discover whether he appreciates the performance.

To-day he just turned his head away. Mother sat down. Aunt Clara looked straight ahead, and
her old-fashioned bonnet hid her face; but I could discover that something more than usual was
working under her cap. I looked at every one of the singers, and then at the players, from the
big bass-viol down to the tenor, and not a bit of reason could I perceive for the twitter the
heads of our pew had certainly got themselves into. There's a pattern old lady, Prudence Clark,
presidentess of the Dorcas Society,--a spinster, just Aunt Clara's age,--a woman who knows everything,
and more too. She sits in the pew before us. She turned her head and gave a sly peep at Aunt
Clara. They both laughed in meeting. I know they did, and they can't deny it. I peeped round at the
minister, and, if he did not laugh too, his face was scarlet, and he was taken with a wonderful fit
of coughing.

Such strange proceedings in meeting I never had seen. The minister, the deacon (father is a
deacon), and the oldest members were setting us young folks a very bad example. But we tolerate
anything in our good old parson.

He was a youth when our old folks were young, and as to us young folks, he remembers us longer
than we do ourselves.

* * * * *

We were all home, and tea was over,--the early tea with substantials, as is the custom in the
primitive districts of New England on Sunday afternoon.

The double accumulation of dishes was disposed of; for at noon we take a cold collation, doughnuts
and cheese, and bread and butter, and we never descend to servile employments till after tea.
Then many hands make light work. I suppose light work does not break the Sabbath, especially as
it is done in our Sunday best, with sleeves tucked up, and an extra apron.

The laughing in church was the point upon which, as yet, we had obtained no satisfaction. Jerusha
and I, in an uncertain hope that we should find out something in
due time, were discussing the music.

The particular point in debate was, why village choirs will astonish the people with pieces of
music in which nobody can join them. We did not settle it, nor has anybody ever solved the
riddle that I know of.

We don't even know whether it comes under the ontological or psychological departments. (There,
now! Haven't I brought in the famous words that our new schoolmaster astonished us with at the
teachers' meeting? He need not think that Webster Unabridged is his particular field, in which
nobody else may hunt.)

We were, as I said, discussing the music. Mother was flitting round, giving the final dust-off and
brush-about after our early tea. Aunt Clara was sitting quietly at the window, pretending
to read Baxter's "Saint's Rest." Jerusha and I tried to imitate the tune, and we did it, as well as
we could, and I am sure we are not bad singers. Mother slipped out of the room just as we came
to
"And vie with Gabriel, while he sings."

She ran as if something
had stung her, and she was making for the hartshorn or some fresh
brook-mud. Aunt Clara's face laughed all over, and I said:

"Come,
now, Aunt Clara, you are really irreverent. You began laughing in
meeting, and you are keeping it up over that good book."

"Downright
wicked," said Jerusha. She dreaded the latter's pride, the resolute
selfishness of his scheme of life, which would lead him to drop her should she interfere with
it. She was learning to dread even more Graydon's high-toned sense of honor, the final decisions
he reached from motives which had slight influence with her. What if she should permit both
men to slip from her grasp, while she hesitated? She fairly turned cold with horror at the
thought of this and of the poverty which might result.

Thus, from widely differing motives, two girls were sighing for time; and Graydon Muir, strong,
confident, proud of his knowledge of society and ability to take care of himself, was walking
blindly on, the victim of one woman's guile, the object of another woman's pure, unselfish
love, and liable at any hour to be blasted for life by the fulfilment of his hope and the consummation
of his happiness.

Sweet Madge Alden, hiding your infinite treasure, deceiving all and yet so true, may you have time!

CHAPTER XXI

SUGGESTIVE TONES

Miss Wildmere had promised to drive with Graydon on the following morning, but Madge felt as
if heaven had interfered in her behalf, for the skies were clouded, and the rain fell unceasingly.
People were at a loss to beguile the hours. Graydon, Miss Wildmere, and Mr. Arnault played
pool together, while Mr. Muir, his wife, and Madge bowled for an hour, the last winning most
of the games. Mr. Arnault had a certain rude sense of fair play, and it appeared to him that
Graydon's course had become all that he could ask--more than he could naturally expect. The
lady was apparently left wholly free to make her choice between them, and all protest, even
by manner, against her companionship with him had ceased. He could drive, walk, or dance with
her at his will; then Graydon would quietly put in an appearance and make the most of his opportunity.
Arnault was not deceived, however. He knew that his present rival was the most dangerous one
that he had ever encountered--that Stella might accept him at any time and was much inclined
to do so speedily. Indeed, he was about driven to the belief that she would do so at once but
for the fear that the Muirs were in financial peril. He hoped that this fear and the pressure
of her father's need might lead her to decide in his favor, without the necessity of his being
the immediate and active agent in breaking down the Muirs. As a business man, he shrunk from
this course, and all the more because Graydon was acting so fairly. Nevertheless, he would
play his principal card if he must. It was his nature to win in every game of life, and it
had become a passion with him to secure the beautiful girl that he had sought so long and vainly.
If it could appear to the world that he had fairly won her, he would not scruple at anything
in the accomplishment of his purpose, and would feel that he had scored the most brilliant
success in his life. If he could do this without ruining them, he would be glad, and his good-will
was enhanced by Graydon's course this morning. The former had sauntered into the billiard-room,
but, seeing Graydon with Miss Wildmere, had been about to depart, when Muir had said, cordially,
"Come, Arnault, take a cue with us," and had quite disarmed him by frank courtesy.

At last the sound of music and laughter lured them to the main hall, and there they found Madge
surrounded by children and young people, little Nellie Wilder clinging to her side the most
closely, with Mr. and Mrs. Wilder looking at the young girl with a world of grateful good-will
in their eyes.

"Oh, Miss Alden, sing us another song," clamored a dozen voices.

"Yes," cried Jennie Muir; "the funny one you sang for us in the woods."

Madge smilingly complied, and the children fairly danced in their delight at the comical strains,
abrupt pauses, droll sentiment, and interlarded words of explanation. The more elderly guests
were attracted, and the audience grew apace. Having finished her little musical comedy, Madge
arose, and Mr. Arnault, aware of Stella Wildmere's ability to sing selections from opera, said,
"Since the children have been so well entertained, I suggest that we who have the misfortune
to be grown have our turn, and that Miss Wildmere give us some grown-up music."

Madge flushed slightly, and Miss Wildmere, after a little charming hesitation, seated herself
at the piano, and sang almost faultlessly a selection from an opera. It was evident that she
had been well and carefully trained, and that within her limitations, which she thoughtfully
remembered, she gave little occasion for criticism. Both her suitors were delighted. They applauded
so heartily, and urged so earnestly with others, that she sang again and again, to the unaffected
pleasure of the throng who had now gathered. At last she pleaded fatigue, and rose from the
instrument, flushing proudly amid vociferous encores. Graydon was about to ask Madge to sing
again, when an old gentleman who had listened to the children's ditties, and had detected unusual
sweetness and power in Madge's tones, said, promptly, "I may be mistaken, but I have an impression
that Miss Alden can give us some grown-up music, if she will."

Instantly his suggestion was seconded by general entreaty, in which not only Graydon joined
from sincere good-will, but also Mr. Arnault, in the hope of giving Stella a triumph, for he
believed that the best her social rival could do would be to render some ballad fairly well.

Madge's brow contracted, as though she were irresolute and troubled.

"Truly, Miss Alden," said Stella, who was standing near, "I have done my part to beguile the
dismal day; I think you might favor us, also. There are no critics here, I hope. We should
enjoy a simple song if you cannot now recall anything else."

"Very well, then, I will give you a little German song that my old teacher loved well;" but
Graydon saw the same slight flush and a resolute expression take the place of her hesitancy.

After a brief prelude, which, to his trained ear, revealed her perfect touch, her voice rose
with a sweet, resonant power that held those near spellbound, and swelled in volume until people
in distant parts of the house paused and listened as if held by a viewless hand. Connoisseurs
felt that they were listening to an artist and not an amateur; plain men and women, and the
children, knew simply that they were enjoying music that entranced them, that set their nerves
thrilling and vibrating. Madge hoped only that her voice might penetrate the barriers between
herself and one man's heart. She did not desire to sing on the present occasion. She did not
wish to annoy him by the contrast between her song and Miss Wildmere's performance, feeling
that he would naturally take sides in his thoughts with the woman outvied; nor had she any
desire to inflict upon her rival the disparagement that must follow; but something in Miss
Wildmere's self-satisfied and patronizing tone had touched her quick spirit, and the arrogant
girl should receive the lesson she had invited. But, as Madge sang, the noble art soon lifted
her above all lower thoughts, and she forgot everything but Graydon and the hope of her heart.
She sang for him alone, as she had learned to sing for him alone.

In spite of her explanations he looked at her with the same old wonder and perplexity of which
he had been conscious from the first. If she had merely sung with correctness and taste, like
Miss Wildmere, there would have been nothing to disturb his complacent admiration; but now
he almost felt like springing to her side with the words, "What is it, Madge? Tell me all."

As the last lovely notes ceased, only the unthinking children applauded. From the others there
was entreaty.

"Please sing again, Miss Alden," said the gentleman who had first asked her. "I am an old man,
and can't hope for many more such rich pleasures. I am not an amateur, and know only the music
that reaches my heart."

"Sing something from 'Lohengrin,' Madge," said Henry Muir, quietly. She glanced at him, and
there was a humorous twinkle in his eyes.

Herr Brachmann had trained her thoroughly in some of Wagner's difficult music, and she gave
them a selection which so far surpassed the easy melodies of Verdi, which Miss Wildmere had
sung, that the latter sat pale and incensed, yet not daring to show her chagrin. This music
was received with unbounded applause, and then a little voice piped, "The big folks have had
more'n their turn; now give us a reg'lar Mother Goose."

This request was received with acclamations, and soon ripples of laughter broke over the crowd
in all directions, and then one of the adoring boys who were usually worshipping near cried
out, "A reel, Miss Alden, a reel, and let us finish up with a high old dance before dinner."

Graydon seized Miss Wildmere's hand, boys made profound bows to their mothers, husbands dragged
their protesting wives out upon the floor. Soon nearly all ages and heights were in the two
long lines, many feet already keeping time to Madge's rollicking strains. Never had such a
dance been known before in the house, for the very genius and inspiration of mirth seemed to
be in the piano. The people were laughing half the time at the odd medley of tunes and improvisations
that Madge invoked, and gray-bearded men indulged in some of the antics that they had thought
forgotten a quarter of a century before. As the last couple at the head of the lines was glancing
down the archway of raised and clasped hands, the lively strains ceased, and the dancers swarmed
out, with thanks and congratulations upon their lips, only to see Madge flying up the stairway.

"Madge," said Graydon, at dinner, "I suppose you will tell me you have practiced over and over
again every note you sang this morning."

"Certainly; some of the more difficult ones hours and hours and months and months. Herr Brachmann
was an amiable dragon in music, and insisted on your knowing what you did know."

"I thought you would say all this, but it doesn't account for your singing."

"What do you mean?"

"I don't know exactly. There is something you did not get from Herr Brachmann--scarcely from
nature. It suggests what artists call feeling, and more."

"Oh, every one has his own method," said Madge, carelessly, and yet with a visible increase
of color.

"'Method,' do you call it? I'm half inclined to think that it might be akin to madness were
you very unhappy. The human voice often has a strange power over me, and I have a theory that
it may reveal character more than people imagine. Why shouldn't it? It is the chief medium
of our expression, and we may even unconsciously reveal ourselves in our tones."

"When were you so fanciful before? What does a professional reveal?"

"Chiefly that she is a trained professional, and yet even the most blasé among them give hints
as to the compass of their woman-nature. I think their characters are often suggested quite
definitely by their tones. Indeed, I even find myself judging people by their voices. Henry's
tones indicate many of his chief traits accurately--as, for instance, self-reliance, reserve,
quiet and unswerving purpose."

"Well," asked Mrs. Muir, who was a little obtuse on delicate points, "what did Miss Wildmere's
tones indicate?"

Graydon was slightly taken aback, and suddenly found that he did not like his theory so well
as he had thought. "Miss Wildmere's tones," he began, hesitatingly, "suggested this morning
little more than a desire to render well the music she sang, and to give pleasure to her listeners."

"I thought they suggested some self-complacency, which was lost before the morning was over,"
added Mr. Muir, dryly.

"Miss Wildmere sang admirably," exclaimed Madge, warmly, "and could sing much better if she
had been trained in a better method and gave more time to the art. I sang hours every day for
nearly two years. Nothing will take the place of practice, Graydon. One must develop voice
like muscle."

"You are a generous, sensible critic, Madge," he said, quietly, although there was a flush
of resentment on his face at his brother's words. "In the main you are right, but I still hold
to my theory. At least, I believe that in all great music there is a subtle individuality and
motif. Love may be blind, but it is not deaf. Miss Wildmere gave us good music, not great music."

Mr. Muir began talking about the weather as if it were the only subject in his mind, and soon
afterward Madge went to her room with bowed head and downcast heart.

"I have no chance," she sighed. "He loves her, and that ends all. He is loyal to her, and will
be loyal, even though she breaks his heart eventually, as I fear. It's his nature."

CHAPTER XXII

DISHEARTENING CONFIDENCES

Under a renewed impulse of loyalty Graydon intercepted Miss Wildmere as she was going to her
room, and said: "The clouds in the west are all breaking away--they ever do, you know, if one
has patience. We can still have our drive and enjoy it all the more from hope deferred."

"I'm so sorry," she began, in some embarrassment. "Of course I couldn't know last night that
it would rain in the morning, and so promised Mr. Arnault this afternoon."

"It seems as if it would ever be hope deferred to me, Miss Wildmere," he said, gravely.

"But, Graydon, you must see how it is--"

"No, I don't see, but I yield, as usual."

"I promise you Sunday afternoon or the first clear day," she exclaimed, eagerly.

"Very well," he replied, brightening. "Remember I shall be a Shylock with this bond." But he
was irritated, nevertheless, and went out on the piazza to try the soothing influence of a cigar.

The skies cleared rapidly. So did his brow; and before long he muttered: "I'll console myself
by another gallop with Madge. There goes my inamorata, smiling upon another fellow. How long
is this going to last? Not all summer, by Jupiter! Her father must not insist on her playing
that game too long, even though she does play it so well."

Madge was sitting in her room in dreary apathy and spiritless reaction from the strain of the
morning, when she was aroused by a knock on her door. "Madge," called a voice that sent the
blood to her face, "what say you to another ride? I know the roads are muddy, but--"

"But I'll go with you," she cried. "Why use adversatives in the same breath with 'ride'? The
mud's nothing. What won't rub off can stay on. How soon shall I be ready?"

"That's a good live girl. In half an hour."

When they were a mile or two away Madge asked, as if with sudden compunction, "Graydon, are
you sure you were disengaged?"

He laughed outright. "That question comes much too late," he said.

She braced herself as if to receive a deadly blow, and was pale and rigid with the effort as
she asked, with an air of curiosity merely, "Are you truly engaged to Miss Wildmere, Graydon?"

"In one sense I am, Madge," he replied, gravely. "I have given her my loyalty, and, to a certain
extent, my word; but I have not bound her. Since you have proved so true and generous a friend
to me I do not hesitate to let you know the truth. I am sorry you do not like her altogether,
and that you have some cause for your feeling; but you are both right at heart. She spoke most
enthusiastically of your rescue of the child. You ladies amuse me with your emphasis of little
piques; but when it comes to anything large or fine you do justice to one another. Henry had
no right to say what he did at dinner, for Stella applauded you as you had her; but Henry's
prejudices are inveterate. Why should I not be loyal to her, Madge? I believe she remained
free for my sake during the years of my absence."

"I think your feelings are very natural. They are what I should expect of you. You have always
seemed to me the soul of honor when once you obtain your bearings," she added, with a wan smile.

"How pale you are, Madge!" he said, anxiously.

"I am not feeling very well to-day, and then I am suffering from the reaction of this morning.
I never can get over my old timidity and dislike to do anything in public. I can do what I
will, but it often costs me dear. I was led on unexpectedly this morning. I only anticipated
singing a ditty for the children when I first went to the piano at their request."

"I saw that, Madge. Any other woman with your power of song would have made it known long before
this."

"And, believe me, Graydon, I did not want to sing in rivalry with Miss Wildmere. I'm sorry I did."

"I saw that too," he replied, laughing. "Stella drew that little experience down upon herself."

"I'm sorry now that I sang," she said, in a low tone. "I didn't want to do anything to hurt
the feelings of so good a friend as you are."

"You didn't hurt my feelings in the least. Just the contrary. You gave much pleasure, and made
me all the more proud of you. It will do Stella no harm to have her self-complacency jostled
a little. Slight wonder that her head is somewhat giddy from the immense amount of attention
she has received. I'm not perfect, Madge; why should I demand perfection? It's delightful to
be talking in this way--like old times. I used to talk to you about Stella years ago. If I
have the substance I can forego the shadow, and I do feel that I can say to you all that I
could to a sensible and loving sister. Believe me, Madge, I can never get over my old feeling
for you, and I'm just as proud of you as if your name was Madge Muir. I think your brave effort
and achievement at Santa Barbara simply magnificent. You have long had the affection that I
would give to a sister, and now that I understand you, I feel for you all the respect that
I could give to any woman."

"Those are kind, generous words, Graydon. I knew that you misunderstood me, and I was only
provoked at you, not angry."

"You had good reason to be provoked and much more. If you and Stella understood each other
in the same way, and--well--if she were only out of that atmosphere in which she has been brought
up, I could ask nothing more."

"What atmosphere?"

"Wall Street atmosphere transferred to the domestic and social circle. You have too much delicacy,
Madge, to refer to what I know puzzles you, and I admit that I do not fully understand it all,
though I know Stella's motive clearly enough. Her motive is worthy of all commendation, but
not her method. She is not so much to blame for this as her father, and perhaps her mother,
who appears a weak, spiritless woman, a faint echo of her husband. It is here that the infernal
Wall Street atmosphere comes in that she has breathed all her life. Does it not puzzle you,
in view of my relations to her, that she should be out driving with Arnault?"

"Yes, Graydon, it does."

"Well, Arnault is a money-lender, and I am satisfied that in some way he has her father in
his power. Many of these brokers are like cats. They will hold on to anything by one nail,
and the first thing you know they are on their feet again all right. As soon as Wildmere makes
a lucky strike in the stock-market he will extricate himself and his daughter at the same time.
Of course these things are not formulated in words, in a cold-blooded way, I suppose. Arnault
has long been a suitor that would take no rebuff. I am satisfied that she has refused him more
than once, but he simply persists, and gives her to understand that he will take his chances.
This was the state of affairs when I came home, and she, no doubt, feels that if she can save
her father, and keep a home for her mother and the little one, she ought to retain her hold
on Arnault. After all, it is not so bad. Many women marry for money outright, and all poor
Stella proposes is to be complaisant toward a man who would not continue his business support
to one whose daughter had just refused him."

Madge was silent.

"You wouldn't do such a thing, I suppose."

"I couldn't, Graydon," she said, simply. "If I should ever love a man I think I could suffer
a great deal for his sake, but there are some things I couldn't do."

"I thought you would feel so."

"Why don't you help her father out?" Madge faltered.

"I don't think I have sufficient means. I have never been over-thrifty in saving, and have
not laid by many thousands. I have merely a good salary and very good prospects. You can't
imagine how slow and conservative Henry is. In business matters he treats me just as if I were
a stranger, and I must prove myself worthy of trust at every point, and by long apprenticeship,
before he will give me a voice in affairs. He says coming forward too fast is the ruination
of young men in our day. Nothing would tempt him to have dealings with Mr. Wildmere, and I
couldn't damage myself more than by any transactions on my own account. But even if I were
rich I wouldn't interfere. I don't like her father any better than Henry does, and if I began
in this way it would make a bad precedent. What's more, I won't introduce money influences
into an affair of this kind. If it comes to the point, Stella must decide for me, ignoring
all other considerations. If she does, I won't permit her family to suffer, but I propose to
know that she chooses me absolutely in spite of everything. I am also resolved that she shall
be separated from her family as far as is right, for there is a tone about them that I don't like."

"I thank you for your confidence, Graydon," said Madge, quietly. "You are acting just as I
should suppose you would. No one in the world wishes you happiness more earnestly than I do.
Come, let us take this level place like the wind."

She was unusually gay during the remainder of their ride, but seemed bent almost on running
her horse to death. "To-morrow is Sunday," she explained, "and I must crowd two rides into one."

"Wouldn't you ride to-morrow?"

"No; I have some old-fashioned notions about Sunday. You have been abroad too long, perhaps,
to appreciate them."

"I appreciate fidelity to conscience, Madge."

They had their supper together again as on the evening before, but Madge was carelessly languid
and fitful in her mirthful sallies, and complained of over-fatigue. "I won't come down again
to-night," she said to Graydon as they passed out of the supper-room. "Good-night."

"Good-night, Madge," he replied, taking her hand in both his own. "I understand you now, and
know that you have gone beyond even your superb strength to-day. Sleep the sleep of the justest
and truest little woman that ever breathed. I can't tell you how much you have added to my
happiness during the past two days."

"He understands me!" she muttered, as she closed the door of her room. "I am almost tempted
to doubt whether a merciful God understands me. Why was this immeasurable love put into my
heart to be so cruelly thwarted? Why must he go blindly on to so cruel a fate? Of course she'll
renounce everything for him. Whatever else she may be, she is not an idiot."

Henry Muir's quiet eyes had observed Madge closely, and from a little distance he had seen
the parting between her and his brother. Then he saw Graydon seek Miss Wildmere and resume
a manner which he had learned to detest, and the self-contained man went out upon the grounds,
and said, through clinched teeth: "To think that there should have been such a fool bearing
the name of Muir! He's been gushing to Madge about that speculator, and we shall yet have to
take her as we would an infection."

CHAPTER XXIII

THE FILIAL MARTYR

Miss Wildmere appeared in one of her most brilliant moods that evening. There was a dash of
excitement, almost recklessness, in her gray eyes. She and Mr. Arnault had been deputed to
lead the German, but she took Graydon out so often as to produce in Mr. Arnault's eyes an expression
which the observant Mr. Wildmere did not like at all. He had just returned from dreary, half-deserted
Wall Street, which was as dead and hopeless as only that region of galvanic life can be at
times. He had neither sold nor bought stock, but had moused around, with the skill of an old
habitué, for information concerning the eligibility of the two men who were seeking his daughter's
hand. In the midsummer dullness and holiday stagnation the impending operation in the Catskills
was the only one that promised anything whatever. He became more fully satisfied that Arnault's
firm was prospering. They had been persistent "bears" on a market that had long been declining,
and had reaped a golden harvest from the miseries of others. On the other hand, he learned
that Henry Muir was barely holding his own, and that he had strained his credit dangerously
to do this. He knew about the enterprise which had absorbed the banker's capital, and while
he believed it would respond promptly to the returning flow of the financial tide, it now seemed
stranded among more hopeless ventures. There was no escaping the conviction that Muir was in
a perilous position, and that a little thing might push him over the brink. Therefore, he had
returned fully beat upon using all his influence in behalf of Arnault, and was spurred to this
effort by the fact that his finances, but not his expenses, were running low. His wife could
give but a dubious account of Stella's conduct.

"In short," said Mr. Wildmere, irritably, "she is dallying with both, and may lose both by
her hesitating folly."

His daughter's greeting was brief and formal. A sort of matter-of-course kiss had been given,
and then he had been left to eat his supper alone, since his wife could not just then be absent
from her child. At last he lounged out on the piazza, sat down before one of the parlor windows,
glanced at the gay scene within, and smoked in silence. Before the German began, Graydon passed
him several times, regarding him curiously and with a growing sense of repulsion. He disliked
to think that the relation between this man and the girl he would marry was so close.

Before the evening was over, Mr. Wildmere saw that his daughter was in truth pursuing a difficult
policy. The angry light in Arnault's eyes and the grave expression on Graydon's face proved
how fraught with peril it was to his hopes. Neither of her suitors liked Stella's manner that
evening, for it suggested traits which promised ill for the future. Graydon, who understood
her the less, was the more lenient judge.

"Not only Arnault," he thought, "but her father also, has been pressing her toward a course
from which she revolts, and she is half reckless in consequence."

He endeavored by his quiet and observant attention, by the grave and gentle expression of his
eyes, to assure her once more that she could find a refuge in him the moment that she would
decide absolutely in his favor. She understood him well, and was enraged that she could not
that night go out with him into the moonlight, put her hand in his, and end her suspense.

Her father had whispered, significantly, when they met, "Stella, I must see you before you
give Mr. Muir further encouragement;" and she, feeling that it might be among her last chances,
for the present, of showing Graydon favor, was lavish of it. But it was not the preference
of strong, true, womanly choice; it was rather the half-defiant aspect with which forbidden
fruit might be regarded.

As the great clock was about to chime the hour of midnight the dancing ceased. Arnault seemed
determined to have the last word, and Graydon interposed no obstacle. The former walked on
the piazza by Stella's side for a few turns in moody silence. Her father still sat at his post
of observation. Mrs. Wildmere had been with him part of the time, but he had not had much to
say to her.

"Mr. Arnault," said Stella, satirically, at last, "I will not tax your remarkable power for
entertainment any longer. I will now join papa, and retire."

"Very well, Stella," was the quiet reply; "but before we part I shall speak more to the point
than if I had talked hours. By this time another week the question must be decided."

She bowed, and made no other answer.

"Stella," said her father when they were alone and he had regarded for some moments her averted
and half-sullen face, "what do you propose to do?" There was no answer.

After another pause he continued: "In settling the question, represent your mother and myself
by a cipher. That is all we are, if the logic of your past action counts for anything. Again
I ask, What do you propose to do? No matter how pretty and flattered a girl may be, she cannot
alter gravitation. There are other facts just as inexorable. Shutting your eyes to them, or
any other phase of folly, will not make the slightest difference."

"I think it's a horrid fact that I must marry a man that I don't love."

"That is not one of the facts at all. Stock-gambler as I am, and in almost desperate straits,
I require nothing of the kind. Knowing you as I do, I advise you to accept Arnault at once;
but I do not demand it; I do not even urge it. If you loved me, if you would say, 'Give up
this feverish life of risk; I will help you and suffer with you in your poverty; I will marry
Graydon Muir and share his poverty,' I would leave Wall Street at once and forever. It's a
maelstrom in which men of my calibre and means are sucked down sooner or later. The prospects
now are that it will be sooner, unless I am helped through this crisis."

"I believe you are mistaken about the Muirs being in financial danger."

"I am not mistaken. They may have to suspend daring the coming week."

"I know that Graydon Muir has no suspicion of trouble."

"He is but a clerk in his brother's employ, and has just returned from a long absence. Mr.
Muir is one of the most reticent of men. I have invested in the same dead stock that is swamping
him, and so know whereof I speak. Should this stock decline further--should it even remain
where it is much longer--he can't maintain himself. I know, for I have taken pains to obtain
information since I last went to town."

"But if the stock rises," she said, with the natural hope of a speculator's daughter, "he is safe."

"Yes, if."

"How much time will you give me?" she asked, the lines of her face growing hard and resolute.

"This is to be your choice, not mine," said her father, coldly. "You shall not be able to say
that I sold you or tried to sell you. Of course it would be terribly hard for me to lose my
footing and fall, and I feel that I should not rise again. Arnault worships success and worldly
prestige. You are a part of his ambitious scheme. If you helped him parry it out he would do
almost anything you wished, and he could throw business enough in my way to put me speedily
on my feet. You must make your choice in view of the following facts: You can go on living
here, just as you are, two or three weeks longer, dallying with opportunity. By that time,
unless I get relief and help, I shall reach the end of my resources, and creditors will take
everything. The Muirs cannot help me, and I don't believe they would in any event. I am not
on good terms with Henry Muir. If they go down now they will be thoroughly cleaned out. Arnault
has long been devoted to you, and you could have unbounded influence over him if you acted
in the line of his ruling passion. It would gratify his pride and add to the world's good opinion
of him if I prospered also. In plain English, we may all be in a tenement house in a month,
or I on safe ground and you the affianced wife of a rich man."

"Well," said Stella, coldly, "you have given me facts enough. It's a pity you couldn't have
brought me something better from Wall Street after all these years."

"What have you brought to me during these past years," he demanded, sternly, "but constant
requests for money, and the necessity for incessant effort to meet new phases of extravagance?
You have not asked what was kind, merciful, and true, but what was the latest style. Few days
pass but that I am reminded of you by a bill for some frippery or other; but how often am I
reminded of you by acts of filial thoughtfulness, by words of sympathy in my hard battle of
life when I am present, or by genial letters when absent? I have spent three hot days in the
city seeking chiefly your interest, and a more mechanical, perfunctory thing never existed
than your kiss of greeting to-night. There was as much feeling in it as in the quarter that
I handed to the stage-driver. I have spent thousands on your education, but you don't sing
for me, you don't read to me, you never think of soothing my overtaxed nerves by cheerful,
hopeful talk. Were I a steel automaton, supplying your wants, I should answer just as well,
and in that case you might remember the laws of matter and apply a little oil occasionally.
What are the motives of your life but dress, admiration, excitement, a rapid succession of
men to pass under your baleful fascination, and then to pass on crippled in soul for having
known you? Unless you can give Graydon Muir a loving woman's heart, and mean to cling to him
for worse as well as better, you will commit a crime before God and man if you accept him.
With Arnault it is different. In mind you are near enough of kin to marry. As long as you complied
with fashionable and worldly proprieties, he would be content; but a man with a heart and soul
in his body would perish in the desert of a home that your selfishness would create."

"It's awful for you to talk to me in this way!" she whined, wincing and crying under his arraignment.

"It's awful that I have to speak to you in this way, either to make you realize what deformities
your beauty hides, so that you may apply the remedy, or else, if you will not, to promote your
union with a man content to take for a wife a belle, and not a woman.

"I suppose I am chiefly to blame, though, or you would be different," he added, with a dark,
introspective look. "I was proud of you as a beautiful child, and tried to win your love by
indulgence. Heaven knows, I would like to be a different man, but it's all a breathless hurry
after bubbles that vanish when grasped! Well, what do you propose to do? You see that you can't
hesitate much longer."

"I will decide soon," she answered, sullenly. Although her conscience echoed his words, and
she felt their justice, her pride prevailed, and she permitted him to depart without another word.

CHAPTER XXIV

"I'LL SEE HOW YOU BEHAVE"

The dawn of the following sacred day was bright, beautiful, and serene, bringing to the world
a new wealth of opportunity. Miss Wildmere began its hours depressed and undecided. Her conscience
and better angel were pleading; she felt vaguely that her life and its motives were wrong,
and was uncomfortable over the consciousness. Her phase of character, however, was one of the
most hopeless. It was true that her vanity had grown to the proportions of a disease, but even
this might be overcome. Her father's stern words had wounded it terribly, and she had experienced
twinges of self-disgust. But another trait had become inwrought, by long habit, with every
fibre of her soul--selfishness. It was almost impossible to give up her own way and wishes.
Graydon Muir pleased her fancy, and she was bent on marrying him. Her father's assurance that
she would bring him disappointment, not happiness, weighed little. Too many men had told her
that she was essential to their happiness to permit qualms on this score. Her conscience did
shrink, to some extent, from a loveless, business-like marriage, and her preference for Graydon
made such a union all the more repugnant; but she was incapable of feeling that she would do
him a wrong by giving him the pretty jewelled hand for which so many had asked. Indeed, the
question now was, Could she be so self-sacrificing as to think of it under the circumstances?
If that stock would only rise, if in some way she could be assured that the Muirs would be
sustained, and so pass on to the wealth sure to flow in upon them in prosperous times, she
would decide the question at once, whether they would do anything for her father or not. He
could scramble on in some way, as he had done in the past. What she desired most was the assurance
that there should be no long and doubtful interregnum of poverty and privation--that she might
continue to be a queen in society during the period of youth and beauty.

This remained the chief consideration amid the chaos of her conflicting feelings and interests,
for she had lived this life so long that she could imagine no other as endurable. She had,
moreover, the persistence of a small nature, and longed to humiliate the Muir pride, and to
spite Madge Alden, who she half believed cherished more than a sisterly regard for Graydon.
As for her father, she did little more than resent his words and the humiliating disquietude
they had caused. They had sorely wounded her vanity, and presented a painful alternative.

As the day passed, and old habits of mind resumed sway, she began to concentrate her thoughts
on three questions: Should she accept Graydon and take her chances with him? Should she accept
Mr. Arnault, with his wealth, and be safe? or should she hesitate a little longer, in the hope
that she could secure Graydon and wealth also? The persistence of a will that had always had
its own way decided finally in favor of the last course of action. She would not give Graydon
up unless she must, and not until she must. Accustomed to consult self-interest, she believed
that her father was doing the same, that he was favoring Arnault because the latter would be
more useful to him, and that for this reason he was exaggerating the Muirs' peril, if not inventing
it. She dismissed his words about leaving Wall Street with scarcely a thought; he always talked
in this way when the times were bad or his ventures unlucky. They had been on the eve of ruin
so many times, that the cry of "wolf" was not so alarming as formerly.

"I suppose I must decide before this week is over," she thought. "Arnault has practically given
me this length of time, and I shall take him at his word." Therefore, she was very sweet to
him during the morning hours, and prepared him to submit to her drive with Graydon in the afternoon.

Arnault felt that he had given his ultimatum, and was resolved to abide by it. At the same
time he knew that it would be a terrible wrench to give up the girl. The very difficulty of
winning her had stimulated to the utmost his passion for attainment. She was the best that
existed in his superficial world, and fulfilled his ideal. Her delicate yet somewhat voluptuous
beauty completely intoxicated him.

He too thought, and made his decision during the day. If he won her at all it must be speedily,
and it should be done by promises of devotion and wealth if possible, and by breaking the Muirs
down if this should become necessary. The time had come for decisive action. It was evident
that her father was in sore straits; the man's appearance confirmed this belief. Arnault was
almost certain that Henry Muir was in his power. He would not play the latter card unless he
must, but he would watch so vigilantly as to be promptly aware of the necessity. He decided
to spend several days of the present week in the mountains and so keep himself informed how
the game went here, and while in the city he would not only be observant, but would also drop
a few words to weaken Mr. Muir's credit. One thing, however, was settled--the problematical
issue of his matrimonial scheme must soon be made known, and he rather relished its congenial
elements of speculative uncertainty, being conscious that so much depended upon his skill and
power to pull unseen wires.

Seeing that Arnault was at Miss Wildmere's side, Graydon accompanied his relatives to church,
and soon found himself looking over the same hymn-book with Madge. The choir were present,
and she now merely delighted Graydon with her rich alto; and so rich and true was it that he
often felt his nerves thrilling at her tones. He did not become absorbed in the service or
sermon, but thought a little wonderingly: "Here is a faith ever finding expression all over
the world, while I ignore it. How much truth does it represent? It's evidently a reality to
Madge, although she makes so little parade of the fact. I don't believe she would do anything
contrary to its teachings as she understands them. We men may think what we please, but we
have confidence in a woman who looks as she does now. She is not in the least inclined to devotional
rhapsodies or to subserviency to priestcraft, like so many women abroad. She merely appears
to recognize a divine power as she accepts nature, only more reverently and consciously. I
suppose I am an agnostic as much as anything, yet I should only be too glad to have Stella
at my side with such an expression on her face. I wonder if she will go with me this afternoon.
I will submit to this diplomacy a few days longer, and shall then end the matter. There is
an increasing revulsion of my whole being from such tactics in my future wife. 'She has too much
poetry in her--too much good sense; her nature is the essence of all that's romantic. I can't
help saying it, though she has treated me cruelly.'

'She has good looks, certainly. I'll own to that. As for her romance and good-feeling, that
I leave to you. I think she has treated you no more cruelly, as you call it, than she has me,
come to that.'

'She told me she would give me an answer in a month,' said Ladywell emotionally.

'So she told me,' said Neigh.

'And so she told him,' said Ladywell.

'And I have no doubt she will keep her word to him in her usual precise manner.'

'But see what she implied to me! I distinctly understood from her that the answer would be favourable.'

'So
did I.'

'So does he.'

'And he is sure to be the one who gets it, since only one of us can.

Well, I wouldn't marry her for love, money, nor--'

'Offspring.'

'Exactly: I would not. "I'll give you an answer in a month"--to all
three of us!

For God's sake let's sit down here and have something to drink.'

They
drew up a couple of chairs to one of the tables of a wine-shop close
by, and shouted to the waiter with the vigour of persons going to
the dogs.

Here, behind the horizontal-headed trees that dotted this part of
the quay, they sat over their bottles denouncing womankind till the
sun got low down upon the river, and the houses on the further side
began to be toned by a blue mist.

At last they rose from their seats and departed, Neigh to dine and
consider his route, and Ladywell to take the train for Dieppe.

While these incidents had been in progress the two workmen had found
their way into the hotel where Ethelberta was staying.

Passing through the entrance, they stood at gaze in the court, much
perplexed as to the door to be made for; the difficulty was solved
by the appearance of Cornelia, who in expectation of them had been
for the last half-hour leaning over the sill of her bed-room window,
which looked into the interior, amusing herself by watching the movements
to and fro in the court beneath.

After conversing awhile in undertones as if they had no real right there at all, Cornelia told
them she would call their sister, if an old gentleman who had been
to see her were gone again.

Cornelia then ran away, and Sol and Dan stood aloof, till they had
seen the old gentleman alluded to go to the door and drive off, shortly
after which Ethelberta ran down to meet them.

'Whatever have you got as your luggage?' she said, after hearing a few words about their journey,
and looking at a curious object like a huge extended accordion with
bellows of gorgeous-patterned carpeting.

'Well, I thought to myself,' said Sol, ''tis a terrible bother about carrying our things. So what
did I do but turn to and make a carpet-bag that would hold all mine
and Dan's too.

This, you see, Berta, is a deal top and bottom out of three-quarter stuff, stained and varnished.
Well, then you see I've got carpet sides tacked on with these brass
nails, which make it look very handsome; and so when my bag is empty
'twill shut up and be only a couple of boards under yer arm, and when
'tis open it will hold a'most anything you like to put in it.

That portmantle didn't cost more than three half-crowns altogether, and ten pound wouldn't
ha' got anything so strong from a portmantle maker, would it, Dan?'

'Well,
no.'

'And then you see, Berta,' Sol continued in the same earnest
tone, and further exhibiting the article, 'I've made this trap-door
in the top with hinges and padlock complete, so that--'

'I am afraid
it is tiring you after your journey to explain all this to me,' said
Ethelberta gently, noticing that a few Gallic smilers were gathering
round.

'Aunt has found a nice room for you at the top of the staircase in that corner--"Escalier
D" you'll see painted at the bottom--and when you have been up come
across to me at number thirty-four on this side, and we'll talk about
everything.'

'Look here, Sol,' said Dan, who had left his brother
and gone on to the stairs.

'What a rum staircase--the treads all in little blocks, and painted chocolate, as I am alive!'

'I
am afraid I shall not be able to go on to Paris with you, after all,' Ethelberta continued
to Sol.

'Something has just happened which makes it desirable for me to return
at once to England.

But I will write a list of all you are to see, and where you are
to go, so that it will make little difference, I hope.'

Ten minutes
before this time Ethelberta had been frankly and earnestly asked by
Lord Mountclere to become his bride; not only so, but he pressed her
to consent to have the ceremony performed before they returned to
England.

Ethelberta had unquestionably been much surprised; and, barring the fact that the viscount
was somewhat ancient in comparison with herself, the temptation to close with his offer was strong,
and would have been felt as such by any woman in the position of Ethelberta, now a little reckless
by stress of circumstances, and tinged with a bitterness of spirit against herself and the world
generally.

But she was experienced enough to know what heaviness might result from a hasty marriage, entered
into with a mind full of concealments and suppressions which, if told, were likely to stop the
marriage altogether; and after trying to bring herself to speak of
her family and situation to Lord Mountclere as he stood, a certain
caution triumphed, and she concluded that it would be better to postpone
her reply till she could consider which of two courses it would be
advisable to adopt; to write and explain to him, or to explain nothing
and refuse him.

The third course, to explain nothing and hasten the wedding, she rejected without hesitation.
With a pervading sense of her own obligations in forming this compact it did not occur to her to
ask if Lord Mountclere might not have duties of explanation equally with herself, though bearing
rather on the moral than the social aspects of the case.

Her resolution not to go on to Paris was formed simply because Lord Mountclere himself was proceeding
in that direction, which might lead to other unseemly rencounters
with him had she, too, persevered in her journey.

She accordingly gave Sol and Dan directions for their guidance to Paris and back, starting herself
with Cornelia the next day to return again to Knollsea, and to decide finally and for ever what
to do in the vexed question at present agitating her.

Never before in her life had she treated marriage in such a terribly
cool and cynical spirit as she had done that day; she was almost frightened
at herself in thinking of it.

How far any known system of ethics might excuse her on the score of those curious pressures which
had been brought to bear upon her life, or whether it could excuse her at all, she had no spirit
to inquire. English society appeared a gloomy concretion enough to abide in as she contemplated
it on this journey home; yet, since its gloominess was less an essential quality than an accident
of her point of view, that point of view she had determined to change.

There lay open to her two directions in which to move. She might annex herself to the easy-going
high by wedding an old nobleman, or she might join for good and all the easy-going low, by
plunging back to the level of her family, giving up all her ambitions
for them, settling as the wife of a provincial music-master named
Julian, with a little shop of fiddles and flutes, a couple of old
pianos, a few sheets of stale music pinned to a string, and a narrow
back parlour, wherein she would wait for the phenomenon of a customer.

And each of these divergent grooves had its fascinations, till she reflected with regard to
the first that, even though she were a legal and indisputable Lady Mountclere, she might be despised
by my lord's circle, and left lone and lorn. The intermediate path of accepting Neigh or Ladywell
had no more attractions for her taste than the fact of disappointing
them had qualms for her conscience; and how few these were may be
inferred from her opinion, true or false, that two words about the
spigot on her escutcheon would sweep her lovers' affections to the
antipodes.

She had now and then imagined that her previous intermarriage with
the Petherwin family might efface much besides her surname, but experience
proved that the having been wife for a few weeks to a minor who died
in his father's lifetime, did not weave such a tissue of glory about
her course as would resist a speedy undoing by startling confessions
on her station before her marriage, and her environments now.

36. THE HOUSE IN TOWN

Returning by way of Knollsea, where she remained a week or two, Ethelberta appeared one evening
at the end of September before her house in Exonbury Crescent, accompanied
by a pair of cabs with the children and luggage; but Picotee was left
at Knollsea, for reasons which Ethelberta explained when the family
assembled in conclave.

Her father was there, and began telling her of a surprising change
in Menlove--an unasked-for concession to their cause, and a vow of
secrecy which he could not account for, unless any friend of Ethelberta's
had bribed her.

'O no--that cannot be,' said she. Any influence of Lord Mountclere to that effect was the last
thing that could enter her thoughts.

'However, what Menlove does makes little difference to me now.' And she proceeded to state that she had
almost come to a decision which would entirely alter their way of living.

'I hope it will not be of the sort your last decision was,' said her mother.

'No; quite the reverse. I shall not live here in state any longer. We will let the house throughout
as lodgings, while it is ours; and you and the girls must manage it. I will retire from the scene
altogether, and stay for the winter at Knollsea with Picotee.

I want to consider my plans for next year, and I would rather be
away from town.

Picotee is left there, and I return in two days with the books and
papers I require.'

'What are your plans to be?'

'I am going to be
a schoolmistress--I think I am.'

'A schoolmistress?'

'Yes.

And Picotee returns to the same occupation, which she ought never
to have forsaken.

We are going to study arithmetic and geography until Christmas; then
I shall send her adrift to finish her term as pupil-teacher, while
I go into a training-school.

By the time I have to give up this house I shall just have got a little country school.'

'But,' said her mother, aghast, 'why not write more poems and sell 'em?'

'Why not be a governess as you were?' said her father.

'Why not go on with your tales at Mayfair Hall?' said Gwendoline.

'I'll answer as well as I can.

I have decided to give up romancing because I cannot think of any more that pleases me. I have been
trying at Knollsea for a fortnight, and it is no use. I will never be a governess again: I would
rather be a servant. If I am a schoolmistress I shall be entirely free from all contact with
the great, which is what I desire, for I hate them, and am getting almost as revolutionary as
Sol. Father, I cannot endure this kind of existence any longer; I sleep at night as if I had
committed a murder: I start up and see processions of people, audiences, battalions of lovers
obtained under false pretences--all denouncing me with the finger of ridicule. Mother's suggestion
about my marrying I followed out as far as dogged resolution would carry me, but during my journey
here I have broken down; for I don't want to marry a second time
among people who would regard me as an upstart or intruder.

I am sick of ambition. My only longing now is to fly from society altogether, and go to any
hovel on earth where I could be at peace.'

'What--has anybody been insulting you?' said Mrs. Chickerel.

'Yes; or rather I sometimes think he may have: that is, if a proposal of marriage is only removed
from being a proposal of a very different kind by an accident.'

'A proposal of marriage can never be an insult,' her mother returned.

'I think otherwise,' said Ethelberta.

'So do I,' said her father.

'Unless the man was beneath you, and I don't suppose he was that,' added Mrs. Chickerel.

'You are quite right; he was not that. But we will not talk of this
branch of the subject.

By far the most serious concern with me is that I ought to do some
good by marriage, or by heroic performance of some kind; while going
back to give the rudiments of education to remote hamleteers will
do none of you any good whatever.'

'Never you mind us,' said her
father; 'mind yourself.'

'I shall hardly be minding myself either,
in your opinion, by doing that,' said Ethelberta dryly.

'But it will be more tolerable than what I am doing now. Georgina, and Myrtle, and Emmeline,
and Joey will not get the education I intended for them; but that must go, I suppose.'

'How full of vagaries you are,' said her mother. 'Why won't it do to continue as you are? No
sooner have I learnt up your schemes, and got enough used to 'em
to see something in 'em, than you must needs bewilder me again by
starting some fresh one, so that my mind gets no rest at all.'

Ethelberta
too keenly felt the justice of this remark, querulous as it was, to
care to defend herself.

It was hopeless to attempt to explain to her mother that the oscillations
of her mind might arise as naturally from the perfection of its balance,
like those of a logan-stone, as from inherent lightness; and such
an explanation, however comforting to its subject, was little better
than none to simple hearts who only could look to tangible outcrops.

'Really, Ethelberta,' remonstrated her mother, 'this is very odd. Making yourself miserable
in trying to get a position on our account is one thing, and not
necessary; but I think it ridiculous to rush into the other extreme,
and go wilfully down in the scale.

You may just as well exercise your wits in trying to swim as in trying
to sink.'

'Yes; that's what I think,' said her father.

'But of course Berta knows best.'

'I think so too,' said Gwendoline.

'And so do I,' said Cornelia.

'If I had once moved about in large circles like Ethelberta, I wouldn't go down and be a schoolmistress--not
I.'

'I own it is foolish--suppose it is,' said Ethelberta wearily, and with a readiness of misgiving
that showed how recent and hasty was the scheme.

'Perhaps you are right, mother; anything rather than retreat.

I wonder if you are right!

Well, I will think again of it to-night.

Do not let us speak more about it now.'

She did think of it that
night, very long and painfully.

The arguments of her relatives seemed ponderous as opposed to her own inconsequent longing for
escape from galling trammels. If she had stood alone, the sentiment that she had begun to build
but was not able to finish, by whomsoever it might have been entertained,
would have had few terrors; but that the opinion should be held by
her nearest of kin, to cause them pain for life, was a grievous thing.

The more she thought of it, the less easy seemed the justification of her desire for obscurity. From
regarding it as a high instinct she passed into a humour that gave
that desire the appearance of a whim.

But could she really set in train events, which, if not abortive,
would take her to the altar with Viscount Mountclere?

In one determination she never faltered; to commit her sin thoroughly
if she committed it at all.

Her relatives believed her choice to lie between Neigh and Ladywell
alone.

But once having decided to pass over Christopher, whom she had loved,
there could be no pausing for Ladywell because she liked him, or for
Neigh in that she was influenced by him.

They were both too near her level to be trusted to bear the shock
of receiving her from her father's hands.

But it was possible that though her genesis might tinge with vulgarity
a commoner's household, susceptible of such depreciation, it might
show as a picturesque contrast in the family circle of a peer.

Hence it was just as well to go to the end of her logic, where reasons
for tergiversation would be most pronounced.

This thought of the viscount, however, was a secret for her own breast
alone.

Nearly the whole of that night she sat weighing--first, the question
itself of marrying Lord Mountclere; and, at other times, whether,
for safety, she might marry him without previously revealing family
particulars hitherto held necessary to be revealed--a piece of conduct
she had once felt to be indefensible.

The ingenious Ethelberta, much more prone than the majority of women
to theorize on conduct, felt the need of some soothing defence of
the actions involved in any ambiguous course before finally committing
herself to it.

She took down a well-known treatise on Utilitarianism which she had
perused once before, and to which she had given her adherence ere
any instance had arisen wherein she might wish to take it as a guide.

Here she desultorily searched for argument, and found it; but the application of her author's
philosophy to the marriage question was an operation of her own, as unjustifiable as it was
likely in the circumstances. That their happiness would be in proportion to her own well-doing,
and power to remove their risks of indigence, required no proving
either to her now.

By a sorry but unconscious misapplication of sound and wide reasoning did the active mind of
Ethelberta thus find itself a solace. At about the midnight hour she felt more fortified on
the expediency of marriage with Lord Mountclere than she had done
at all since musing on it.

In respect of the second query, whether or not, in that event, to
conceal from Lord Mountclere the circumstances of her position till
it should be too late for him to object to them, she found her conscience
inconveniently in the way of her theory, and the oracle before her
afforded no hint.

'Ah--it is a point for a casuist!' she said.

An old treatise on Casuistry lay on the top shelf. She opened it--more from curiosity than from guidance
this time, it must be observed--at a chapter bearing on her own problem, 'The disciplina arcani,
or, the doctrine of reserve.'

Here she read that there were plenty of apparent instances of this in Scripture, and that it was
formed into a recognized system in the early Church. With reference to direct acts of deception,
it was argued that since there were confessedly cases where killing is no murder, might there
not be cases where lying is no sin? It could not be right--or, indeed, anything but most absurd--to
say in effect that no doubt circumstances would occur where every sound man would tell a lie, and
would be a brute or a fool if he did not, and to say at the same time that it is quite indefensible
in principle. Duty was the key to conduct then, and if in such cases duties appeared to clash
they would be found not to do so on examination. The lesser duty would yield to the greater,
and therefore ceased to be a duty.

This author she found to be not so tolerable; he distracted her. She put him aside and gave over
reading, having decided on this second point, that she would, at any hazard, represent the truth to
Lord Mountclere before listening to another word from him. 'Well, at last I have done,' she said,
'and am ready for my role.'

In looking back upon her past as she retired to rest, Ethelberta could almost doubt herself
to be the identical woman with her who had entered on a romantic career a few short years ago.
For that doubt she had good reason. She had begun as a poet of the Satanic school in a sweetened
form; she was ending as a pseudo-utilitarian. Was there ever such a transmutation effected before
by the action of a hard environment? It was not without a qualm of regret that she discerned how
the last infirmity of a noble mind had at length nearly departed from her. She wondered if her
early notes had had the genuine ring in them, or whether a poet who could be thrust by realities
to a distance beyond recognition as such was a true poet at all. Yet Ethelberta's gradient
had been regular: emotional poetry, light verse, romance as an object, romance as a means, thoughts
of marriage as an aid to her pursuits, a vow to marry for the good of her family; in other
words, from soft and playful Romanticism to distorted Benthamism. Was the moral incline upward
or down?

37. KNOLLSEA--AN ORNAMENTAL VILLA

Her energies collected and fermented anew by the results of the vigil, Ethelberta left town for
Knollsea, where she joined Picotee the same evening.

Picotee produced a letter, which had been addressed to her sister at their London residence,
but was not received by her there, Mrs. Chickerel having forwarded it to Knollsea the day
before Ethelberta arrived in town.

The crinkled writing, in character like the coast-line of Tierra del Fuego, was becoming familiar
by this time. While reading the note she informed Picotee, between a quick breath and a rustle
of frills, that it was from Lord Mountclere, who wrote on the subject of calling to see her,
suggesting a day in the following week.

'Now, Picotee,' she continued, 'we shall have to receive him, and make the most of him, for
I have altered my plans since I was last in Knollsea.'

'Altered them again? What are you going to be now--not a poor person after all?'

'Indeed not. And so I turn and turn. Can you imagine what Lord Mountclere is coming for? But
don't say what you think. Before I reply to this letter we must go into new lodgings, to give
them as our address.

The first business to-morrow morning will be to look for the gayest
house we can find; and Captain Flower and this little cabin of his
must be things we have never known.'

The next day after breakfast
they accordingly sallied forth.

Knollsea had recently begun to attract notice in the world. It had this year undergone visitation
from a score of professional gentlemen and their wives, a minor canon, three marine painters,
seven young ladies with books in their hands, and nine-and-thirty babies. Hence a few lodging-houses,
of a dash and pretentiousness far beyond the mark of the old cottages which formed the original
substance of the village, had been erected to meet the wants of such
as these.

To a building of this class Ethelberta now bent her steps, and the crush of the season having
departed in the persons of three-quarters of the above-named visitors,
who went away by a coach, a van, and a couple of wagonettes one morning,
she found no difficulty in arranging for a red and yellow streaked
villa, which was so bright and glowing that the sun seemed to be shining
upon it even on a cloudy day, and the ruddiest native looked pale
when standing by its walls.

It was not without regret that she renounced the sailor's pretty cottage for this porticoed and
balconied dwelling; but her lines were laid down clearly at last,
and thither she removed forthwith.

From this brand-new house did Ethelberta pen the letter fixing the time at which she would be
pleased to see Lord Mountclere.

When the hour drew nigh enormous force of will was required to keep
her perturbation down.

She had not distinctly told Picotee of the object of the viscount's visit, but Picotee guessed
nearly enough. Ethelberta was upon the whole better pleased that the initiative had again come from him
than if the first step in the new campaign had been her sending the explanatory letter, as intended
and promised. She had thought almost directly after the interview at Rouen that to enlighten
him by writing a confession in cold blood, according to her first intention, would be little less
awkward for her in the method of telling than in the facts to be told.

So the last hair was arranged and the last fold adjusted, and she sat down to await a new page of
her history

.
 The man was in his shirt-sleeves, but he put on his coat immediately.
He had a kind of natural, quiet dignity and a subdued manner--the result of his trouble, no
doubt. We were in their little sitting-room or parlor, but the door into the kitchen, where
they had been taking their meal, was open. The room we were in was very plainly furnished,
but perfectly neat, and I was at once struck by the number of books that it contained. Would
you believe it? one of the leading magazines lay on the table. The mother, a pale, gaunt woman,
who looked utterly worn out, went with the doctor to the adjoining sick-room, and the husband's
eyes followed them anxiously.

"'Your place seems rather lonely,' I said to him, 'but you evidently know how to find society
in books.'

"'Yes,' he answered, 'I s'pose this region seems lonesome to you, but not to us who were brought
up here. It all depends on what you're used to, especially when you're a-growin' up. I'm not
much of a reader myself, but Tilly was'; and he heaved a great sigh. 'She took to readin' almost
as soon as to walkin',' he continued, 'and used to read aloud to us. I s'pose I soon dozed
off, but her mother took it all in, and durin' the long winter evenin's they kinder roamed
all over the world together. I suspicion Tilly had more books than was good for her, but she
was our only child, and I couldn't say no to her. She edicated herself to be a teacher, and
stood high, and we was proud of her, sure enough, but I'm afeared all that study and readin'
wasn't good for her;' and then came another of his deep sighs.

"Madge's great eyes meanwhile were more and more full of trouble, and there was a deal of pathos
suggested by the man's simple story. Indeed, I felt my own throat swelling at the poor man's
last sigh, it was so deep and natural, and seemed to express a great sorrow, for which there
were no words in his homely vernacular."

"What selfish egotists we are over our picayune vexations!" Graydon muttered.

"Well, the mother and the doctor now appeared. The latter looked grave; and when he looks grave
things are serious indeed.

"'Ain't she no better?' the father asked, with entreaty in his tone.

"'I wish she was,' said the doctor, in his blunt way, which nevertheless expressed more sympathy
than a lot of fine phrases. Then he said to the mother: 'You're all worn out, and yet she'll
need close watching to-night. Isn't there some neighbor--'

"'Oh, please let me stay!' began Madge, in a low, eager tone, speaking for the first time.
'I'm strong, and I'll follow your directions in everything. Do, please. I've been ill myself,
and think I know how to nurse.'

"The woman hesitated, and looked doubtfully, wonderingly, at the doctor. Madge sprang up, and
taking the mother's hand, continued: 'Indeed, madam, you do look worn out; you will be ill
yourself. For your daughter's sake, as well as mine, let me stay.'

"'For your sake, miss?'

"'Yes, for my sake. Why should I not bear a little of this heavy burden? It will do me good.
Doctor, say I can stay. My strength should not be wasted in amusement only.'

"'Well,' he replied, 'if Mrs. Muir consents, there's no one I'd trust sooner.'

"'Then it's settled, Mary,' she said, in her decisive way. 'It's perfectly proper for me to
stay under the protection of these good people.'

"'But you haven't had your supper,' I began.

"A little color came into the woman's face at my foolish speech, and she said, 'If the young
lady will take what we can offer--'

"'Of course I will,' interrupted Madge, with a smile that would have propitiated a dragon;
'a little bread and milk would suit me best.'

"'She shall have a chicken broiled as nice as she ever tasted at the hotel,' said the man,
impulsively. 'Heaven bless your kind heart, and perhaps you can coax Tilly to take a bit!'

"'The young lady's name is Miss Alden,' said the doctor, 'and this is Mrs. Muir, Mr. and Mrs.
Wendall, ladies; I should have introduced you before, but my mind was on my patient. Well,
well, well, what a world it is! Some very good streaks run through it, though.'

"'I'll come for you in the morning,' I said to Madge, who had thrown off her hat, looking so
resolute and absorbed in her purpose that I knew there was nothing more to be said. So I shook
hands with the poor people, and came away with the doctor."

"I'm going for Madge in the morning," said Graydon, decisively.

"I thought you were going trouting with the doctor."

"Not till I've told Madge what I think of her," he said, gravely.

"I'm sure her impulse and motives were good."

"They were more than good--they were divine, and just like Madge Alden as she now is. She keeps
one's blood tingling with surprises; but I've not become such a cynic that I do not understand
her. When you come to think of it, what is more natural than that one girl with her superb
health should lend her strength to another who, perhaps, is dying; but you may well ask, Who
in the house would think of doing this?"

"Yes; the doctor said she was dying--that she couldn't last much longer."

"Well, I never had a sister, but I'm just as proud of Madge, and just as fond of her, as if
she were my own flesh and blood. She shall never lack what a brother can do for her while I live."

"I'm glad you feel so," said Mrs. Muir. Then she sighed, and thought, "A plague upon him! Why
will he keep following up the other white-faced thing, when he might win Madge if he tried
hard enough. It's plain that she don't care for him now except as she used to. And she does
care for him just as she did before she went away, in spite of all her prudishness about the
words brother and sister. I'm not blind. She has grown so pretty, however, that I suppose Graydon
would wish to kiss her too often. She is just as fond of him as he is of her, and in just the
same way; but if I had his chance I'd soon have it a different way;" and the good lady was
complacency itself over her penetration, as she bade Graydon good-night. No one could see and
report the surface of affairs more accurately than she.

As he descended to the hall, Arnault and Miss Wildmere entered. The latter hastened forward
and gave him her hand most cordially, saying, "Why, Mr. Muir, I'm ever so glad to see you;
you have been away an age."

"A day, Miss Wildmere. Your appearance indicates that you have survived admirably."

"The moon is so bright that we could drive fast, and I'm always happy when in rapid motion."

"You have had the advantage of me then; yet I've been in rapid motion a good part of the day
on express trains."

"I feared you were not going to return to-day," she said, as she strolled out with him on the
piazza.

"Feared?"

"Yes, why not?"

"It strikes me that I might ask, Why?"

"Surely you would not have me lose such an evening as this, Mr. Muir?" she said, a little reproachfully.

"I would have you follow your own heart."

"I shall follow it as soon as possible," she replied, so earnestly that he was disarmed--especially
as the glance which accompanied the words was full of soft allurement and appeal. Of her own
accord she put her hand on his arm, and spoke in low, contented tones, as if she had at last
found rest and refuge. The moon poured around her a flood of radiance, which gave her an ethereal
aspect. Her white drapery enhanced and spiritualized her remarkable beauty, making her appear
all that lover or poet could ask. His own words grew kinder and gentler; his heart went out
to her as never before; she seemed so fair, delicate, and pure in that witching light that
he longed to rescue her at once from her surroundings. Why should he not? She had never manifested
a more gentle and yielding mood. He directed her steps from the piazza to a somewhat distant
summer-house, and her reluctance was a shy half revolt, which only emphasized the natural meaning
of her unspoken consent.

Mrs. Muir was still keeping her eyes open, and from her window saw them pass under the shadow
of the trees.

At last they were sitting alone in the summer night. Graydon felt that words were scarcely
needed--that his manner had spoken unequivocally, and that hers had granted all; but he took
her hand and looked earnestly into her downcast face. "Oh, Stella--" he began.

A twig snapped in the adjacent grove. She sprang up. "Hush, Graydon," she whispered; "not yet.
Please trust me. Oh, what am I thinking of to be out so late!--but could not resist. Come;"
and she started for the house.

As they passed in at the door he said, in a low, deep tone, "You cannot put me off much longer,
Stella."

"No, Graydon," she whispered, hurriedly, and hastened to her room.

In his deep feeling he had not heard the suspicious sound in the grove, and Miss Wildmere's
manner was only another expression of the strong constraint which he believed to be imposed
upon her by her father's financial peril. He felt bitterly disappointed, however. Although
irritated, he was yet rendered more than forgiving by the apparent truth that she had almost
yielded to the impulses of her heart, in spite of grave considerations--and promises perhaps--to
the contrary.

He was at a loss what to do, yet felt that the present condition of affairs was becoming intolerable.
Almost immediately upon his return from Europe he had written to Mr. Wildmere for permission
to pay his addresses, and had received a brief and courteous reply. The thought of again appealing
to the father occurred to him, but was speedily dismissed with unconquerable repugnance. The
very fact that this man compelled his daughter to take such a course made Graydon wish never
to speak to him again. "No," he muttered; "the girl must yield to me, and cut loose from all
her father's shifty ways and associations."

The night was so beautiful, and his thoughts kept him so wakeful, that he sat in a shadow and
watched the moonlight transfiguring the world into beauty. Before long he heard a step, and
a man came from that end of the piazza which was nearest the summer-house. As he passed in,
Graydon saw that it was Arnault. The quick suspicion came into his mind, "Could he have been
watching?" Then flashed another thought, "Could she have become aware of his presence, and
was this the cause of her abrupt flight?"

The latter supposition was dismissed indignantly and at once. The affair was taking on an aspect,
however, so intensely disagreeable that he resolved to write to Miss Wildmere that he would
absent himself until Arnault should disappear below the horizon. He would then go trouting
or take a trip to some other resort. This course he believed would bring her to a decision,
and after their recent interview he could scarcely doubt its nature.

Before he was aware of it, his thoughts returned to Madge. In fancy he saw the gray farmhouse
on the lonely mountain-side, with a sweet face at the window, the dark, sympathetic eyes now
looking out on the silent, moonlit landscape, and again at the thin, white face of a dying
girl. "Poor, poor child!" he thought, reverting to the patient. "Well, for once, at least,
she has had a good angel watching over her. I would like to see Madge's face framed by the
open window in this witching light. Would to Heaven that Stella was more like her! Yet Stella
was beautiful as a dream to-night, and it seemed that my vision of happiness was on the very
eve of fulfilment."

CHAPTER XXVII

MADGE'S STORY

Early in the beautiful morning of the following day Graydon was out securing a light carriage,
for he reasoned that after watching all night Madge would be too weary to enjoy horseback exercise.
He first called on the doctor, and obtained careful directions as to the locality of Madge's
sojourn. "The best I can do is to go with you as guide this afternoon to the trout-stream,
and then drive back by moonlight," the doctor added.

Within an hour Graydon reached the cottage, and Madge ran out to welcome him. "Now, this is
kind and thoughtful of you," she said, and there was unmistakable gladness in her face.

"Dear Madge, you have had a long, dismal night, I fear. I can see it from the lines under your
eyes."

"It has been a sad night, Graydon, yet I am very glad I came, and you have now rewarded me.
The poor girl is sleeping, and I can slip away."

Mr. and Mrs. Wendall parted from her feelingly and gratefully. Madge promised to come again soon.

For a few moments they drove in silence, and then Madge sighed: "How young, fresh, and full
of beautiful life the world seems this morning! The contrast with that poor, suffering, dying
girl is too great. Nature often appears strangely indifferent."

"I am not indifferent, Madge. I kept a sort of watch with you for an hour or two last night
in the wee, sma' hours, and tried to imagine you sitting in just such an open window as I saw
there, with the moonlight on your face; and I thought that the poor girl had one good angel
watching over her. You know I am a man of the world, but an act of ministry like this touches
me closely."

"No, Graydon; not a good angel, but a very human creature was the watcher."

"Tell me about it--that is, continue the story from the point where Mary left off;" and he
explained about Mrs. Muir's account of the previous evening.

"Well, you know what a wilful creature I am?" she began, with the glimmer of a smile.

"Oh, yes; I've learned to understand that feature of your royal womanhood. You are trying to
be a woman, Madge. Well, you are one--the kind I believe in. See how much faith I have--I believe,
yet don't understand."

"No jesting or compliments this morning, please; I'm too heavy-hearted for them now."

"You ought to be serene and happy after so kind and good a deed."

"No," she said, decisively; "that sympathy must be superficial which can pass almost immediately
into self-complacency. Oh, Graydon, it is all so sad, yet not sad; so passing strange, yet
as natural and true as life and death! I did sit for hours just as you imagined, looking out
on the great, still mountains. Never did they seem so vast and stable, and our life so vapor-like,
as when I heard that poor fluttering breath come and go at my side. There was a time when this
truth grew oppressive; but later on that feeble life, which seemed but a breath, came to mean
something greater and more real than the mountains themselves. But I am anticipating. As soon
as Mary departed I became as imperious as I dared to be. I saw that the poor mother had reached
about the limit of her endurance, and I arranged the lounge in the sitting-room, so that she
could lie down at once, saying: 'I am a stranger, and young, and it's not natural that you
should be willing to give up to me too much, nor do I wish you to be far away; yet I can see
just how sorely in need of rest you are. You must finish your supper, give me your directions,
and then lie down and get every bit of rest you can. I can easily keep awake, and promise to
call you whenever you are needed.'

"'Nancy,' her husband added, 'Miss Alden is right. I see by the way she takes hold that she'll
do everything, and you're jest beat out.' So between us we had our way.

"'Bless you, miss,' said the man, trying to smile in a way that almost made me cry, 'I'm as
handy as a woman 'bout a kitchen;' and he soon proved that he was handier than I could have
been, for in a few minutes he pulled up from the well a pail, took out a dressed chicken, and
broiled it to perfection. I made his wife eat some of it, and saved a little of the breast
for poor Tilly, as they call her."

"Did you take any yourself?" interrupted Graydon.

"Oh, yes, indeed! I'm one of those prosaic creatures whose appetite never fails. If the world
were coming to an end to-day I should insist on having my breakfast."

"Madge," said Graydon, ruefully, "I might as well tell you, for I'm sure to be found out: I
once called you 'lackadaisical.'"

"Oh, I knew that over two years ago! What's more, you were right."

"No; I was not right," he answered, positively. "I should have recognized the possibilities
of your nature then. I did in regard to your beauty, but not those higher qualities which bid
fair to make you my patron saint."

"Oh, hush, Graydon. Such words only pain me. I don't want your compliments, and if any man
made a patron saint of me I should be so exasperated that I should probably box his ears. Let
us stick to what is simple, natural, and true, in all our talk."

"You may say what you please, Madge, I see it more clearly every day, and reproach myself that
I did not understand you. I was content to amuse and pet you, and you naturally did not think
me capable of doing anything more. You went away alone to make as brave a fight as was ever
battled out in this world, and I had no part in helping you. Mr. and Mrs. Wayland were worth
a wilderness of superficial society-fellows like me. I now know why you did not care to correspond
with me while making your noble effort."

"Truly, Graydon, your memory and penetration are phenomenal."

"You may disclaim out of kindness now, but I know I am right. You make my life appear shallow
and trivial. What have I done in the last two years but attend carefully, from habit, to the
details of business, and then amuse myself? And when I wrote I merely sought to amuse you.
What were my flippant letters worth to one who was in earnest?"

"Graydon," said Madge, looking into his eyes with gentle dignity, "you may do yourself injustice
if you will, but you shall not misjudge me. I have acquired a little of the art of taking care
of myself, and you are doing me a wrong which I cannot permit. I remember everything, from
the time that your kind eyes rested on the pallid, shrinking child that crept down to the dining-room
when we first met, and from that day to this you have been kind and helpful to me. I said that
I regarded you as one of the best friends I had in the world. Do you think me insincere? Do
you think I forget how kind you were when society would not have tolerated the ghost I was?
I am not one who forgets and ignores the past--who can go on to new friends with a frigid shoulder
for old ones. Let us end these misunderstandings. Before the year is out you will probably
be engaged, perhaps married. Our lives will be widely separated. That is inevitable from the
nature of things. But distance and absence can cause no such separation as results from misunderstanding.
If we should not meet again in twenty years I should be the same loyal friend. Now I've said
it, and don't vex me again by speaking as if I had not said and meant it."

"I can scarcely tell whether your words make me more glad or sad. Each feeling is deeper than
you will ever believe. You certainly give me the impression that if I marry Stella Wildmere
our lives will be separated."

"You don't take nature, especially woman-nature, into consideration at all. I am not congenial
to Miss Wildmere; she does not like me. It is nothing against her, but some people are antagonistic.
This is especially true among women, and in this case it is not strange. Our experiences have
been very different. She has ever been a beautiful, brilliant society-girl. With her at your
side you would always be an object of envy in circles congenial to you, for admiration would
follow her as the light follows day. In the past, you know, I have not been influenced by society
considerations, and in the future they shall be very secondary. Therefore we of necessity are
unlike, and could never be much company for each other. There is never any use in trying to
ignore the old law of 'like unto like.' I say this in explanation of what you know is true
all the world over. Even the close ties of kindred often count for little where tastes, occupations,
and habits of thought are diverse. All this is nothing against your perfect right to please
yourself. In this land, thank Heaven! families and friends cannot yoke people together to pull
forward general and miscellaneous interests."

"You speak as if it were a slight thing when the woman whom a man marries is merely accepted,
tolerated, by his kindred."

"I have not said that, Graydon; I have only said again what I said before--that a man has a
right to please himself. The truth is trite enough; why recur to it?"

"Gravitation is trite enough, but it often has an acute bearing on one's experience. You do
not like Stella--"

"And she does not like me."

"Very well; but you try to be just to her, and when she has lived a while in different associations
you will find her greatly changed. I think you can be her close friend in the future. But Henry
detests her, and he is so quietly and obstinately tenacious in his views that the fact annoys
me exceedingly."

"Very well; you can't help that. You will live in different houses, and your domestic life
will be quite removed from business interests."

"Oh, confound Henry! He married to suit himself, so shall I. But, Madge, dear Madge, you will
try to love her--to help her to be more like you, for my sake?"

At last Madge's laugh rang out merrily. "For mercy's sake, Graydon, don't ask me to be a missionary
to your wife," she cried. "If I escaped with my eyes I should be lucky. You must think your
wife perfection, and make her think you do. Woe be unto you if you introduce a female friend
and suggest that she should be imitated, even to the arch of an eyebrow. Oh, no, I thank you!
That's a sphere in which I shouldn't shine at all, and I wouldn't dare attempt it with any
feminine saint in the calendar. Oh, Graydon, what a dear old goose you are!" and she laughed
till the tears came into her eyes. He joined her in a half vexed way, protesting that she was
still as uncanny as a ghost, although she had lost the aspect of one.

Suddenly she stopped, and tears of sorrow filled her eyes. "Here I am, laughing at our absurd
talk," she said, "when I have just left the side of a poor girl, no older than myself, who
is ghostly indeed in her flickering life. Is it heartless to seem to forget so soon? Oh, Graydon,
you don't know what trouble is! You have only had vexations thus far. Let me tell you what
happened last night, if only to make you grateful for your strong, prosperous life."

"Tell me anything you wish. I always have better thoughts and impulses after being with you."

"Please don't regard me as egotistical, or offend me by thinking I am trying to be better than
others. Why shouldn't I help that poor girl? We often dance all night for fun; why can't we
watch occasionally for pity? And in simple truth it will be a long time before the ache for
that poor creature will go out of my heart. It came very close home, Graydon--very close. It
brought to mind another girl, who was once scarcely stronger or better than Tilly Wendall is
to-day, but God was kind. Tilly also has great black eyes, and they do look so large and pathetic
in the wan little face! At first they did not notice me much. I was only another of the watchers
who had come to aid her mother. It's astonishing how kind these plain country people are to
one another in trouble, and many a housewife in this region has toiled all day and then sat
up with the poor child the livelong night.

"For the first few hours I could do little more than help her move in her weak restlessness,
and give remedies to relieve her incessant cough. The poor thing seemed neither more nor less
than a victim of disease, that with a cruelty almost malign had tortured her. I can't explain
how this awful impression grew upon me. It was as if viewless, brutal hands had racked the
emaciated form until intelligence was gone, and then, not content, would continue their vindictive
work while breath remained in the body. As my watch was prolonged this impression grew into
a nightmare of horror. The still house, the silent, white, beautiful world without, and that
frail young girl tortured hour after hour under my eyes by fever and a convulsive, incessant,
remorseless cough."

She buried her face in her hands, and for a moment or two her voice was choked with sobs.

"Oh, Madge," cried Graydon, almost fiercely, "you anger me! I would strangle a man who harmed
a hair of such a child's head. How can I worship a God who sends or permits such a thing? You
are braver than I. I could see a man shot, but I couldn't look upon what you have described.
Yet the picture brings back the moment when we parted--when you struggled feebly in my arms
with a premonition of your almost mortal weakness, and then sank back white and deathlike.
If you had not made so wise and brave an effort you might have lingered on in torture like
this poor girl. You stood in just that peril, did you not?"

"I suppose I did."

"Oh, what a clod I was! I used to hear you cough night after night, and I would mutter, 'Poor
Madge!' and go to sleep. To think that you might have suffered as this girl is suffering! I
never realized it before, yet I thought I did. I can't tell you how my whole nature rebels
at it all, and pious talk about resignation in the presence of such scenes fairly makes me
grind my teeth;" and his brow blackened like night in his mental revolt, and his eyes were
sternly fixed in honest, indignant arraignment of the Power he did not scruple to defy, though
so impotent to resist.

Madge brushed away her tears, and watched him earnestly for a moment. In that confused instant
she exulted in the strong, generous, kindly manhood that would not cringe even to omnipotence
when apparently cruel. She said, gently, "Graydon, you are condemning God."

"I can't help it," he began, impetuously, "that is, such a God--"

She put her hand over his mouth.

"I like you better for your words," she continued, "but please don't talk so any more. Let
what you have said apply to 'such a God--' I know what you mean, but there is no such being
in existence. Let me finish my story. We have had too many interruptions, and this secluded
road has an end. I won't try to explain my faith. What happened may make it clearer to you.
Well, Tilly gradually grew quieter, and at last slept. The tired mother was sleeping also,
and I sat at the window just as you imagined, my thoughts sad and questioning, to say the least
At last I saw that Tilly was awake, and looking at me with something like interest and curiosity.
I went to her and asked if I could do anything.

"She said, in her slow, feeble way, 'I thought I knew every one about here, but I don't remember
to have seen you before.'

"Then I told her who I was, and that her mother was in the next room.

"'You are very kind,' she said. 'And you are from the hotel. Isn't it a little strange?'

"'It should not be,' I replied, and explained how I came to stay, adding, 'Don't talk any more.
You are not strong enough.'

"With a quiet smile that astonished me, she said, 'It won't make any difference, Miss Alden;
I shall never be any better, or, rather, I shall soon be well. My mind seems growing clearer,
and I'd like to talk a little. It is strange to see a young girl here. Are you strong and well?'

"'Yes, very strong, and very glad to help your mother take care of you. I was once almost as
ill as you are, yet I got well. Cheer up, and let us nurse you back to health.'

"She shook her head. 'No, that's now impossible. You come and cheer poor mother and father,
Miss Alden. I am more than cheerful, I am happy.'

"I made her call me Madge, and said: 'Tell me then in a few words how you can be happy. My
heart has just been aching for you ever since I came.'

"Perhaps she saw tears in my eyes, for she said, 'Sit down by me.' Then she took my hand, leaned
her cheek upon it, and looked at me with such a lovely sympathy in her beautiful dark eyes!

"'Yes,' she said, 'I see you are young and strong, and you probably have wealth and many friends;
still I think I am better off than you are. I am almost home, and you may have long, weary
journeying before you yet. You ask me why I am happy. I'll just give you the negative reasons:
think how much they mean to me--"And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain." All these may be taken from my life any hour. Think
of what will be added to it. You believe all this, Madge?'

"'Yes.'

"'Then you must know why I am happy, and why I may be better off than you are. It will be very
hard for father and mother--there will be more pain for them here in consequence--but soon
it will all end forever; in a little while we shall be together again. So you know nearly all
about poor little me,' she said, with another of her smiles, which were the sweetest, yet most
unearthly things I ever saw. 'And now tell me about yourself. I'm not able to talk much more
for the present. I'd like to know something about the friend who helped me through the last
few steps of my journey. I can think about you in heaven, you know,' she said, with the sweetest
little laugh. 'Don't look so sad, Madge. They'll tell you I'm gone soon. "Gone where?" ask
yourself, and never grieve a moment.'

"Oh, Graydon, she made it all seem so real, talking there alone in the night! And it is just
as she says or it isn't anything. When you said, 'Such a God,' you had in mind a theological
phantom, and I don't wonder you felt as you did; but this girl believes in a God who 'so loved
the world'--who so loved her--and I do also. Her pain, her thwarted young life, I don't understand
any more than I do other phases of evil, but I can give my allegiance to One who came to take
away the evil of the world. That's about all the religion I have, and you mustn't ever say
a word against it.

"Well, there is but little more to tell. Tilly spoke in quiet, broken sentences as her cough
permitted, and I told her a little about myself and sang to her some hymns that mother sang
to me when I was a child. With the dawn her mother came in, and was frightened at having slept
so long, but Tilly laughed and said it was just splendid.

"She was evidently a very intelligent girl, and must have been a pretty one, too. She certainly
has read a great deal, and has taught in public schools. There didn't seem to be a trace of
morbidness in her mind or feeling. She was simply trying to make the best of everything, and
her best certainly is the best. She has helped and comforted me more than I could her."

"Comforted you, Madge?"

"Oh, well," was the somewhat confused reply. "I've had trouble, and shall have again. Who is
without it long in this world?"

"It's almost hard to see how serious trouble can reach you hereafter, you are so strong, so
fortified. No, Madge; I'll never say a word against your faith or that of your new friend.
Would to Heaven I had it myself! I wouldn't have missed this talk with you for the world, and
you can't know how I appreciate the friendship which has led you to speak to me frankly of
what is so sacred. All the whirl and pressure of coming life and business shall never blot
from my memory the words you have spoken this morning or the scenes you have made so real."

If this were true, how infinitely deeper would have been his impression if he could have seen
the beautiful girl, now smiling into his eyes, bowed in agony at that sick-bed, while she acknowledged
with stifled sobs that the dying girl was better off--far happier than she who had to face
almost the certainty of lifelong disappointment. Poor Madge had not told Graydon all her story.
She would have died rather than have her secret known on earth, but she had not feared to breathe
it to one on the threshold of heaven.

CHAPTER XXVIII

DISPASSIONATE LOVERS

During the last moments of their drive Madge and Graydon were comparatively silent. They were
passing dwellings, meeting strangers, and they could not, with the readiness of natures less
finely organized, descend to commonplaces. Each had abundant food for thought, while even Graydon
now believed that he so truly understood Madge, and had so much in common with her, that words
were no longer needed for companionship.

As they approached the piazza, they saw that Arnault was still Miss Wildmere's devoted attendant.
His presence meant hope for Madge, and Graydon was slightly surprised at his own indifference.
He felt that the girl to whom he regarded himself as bound belonged to a different world, a
lower plane of life than that of which he had been given a glimpse. The best elements of his
nature had been profoundly moved, and brought to the surface, and he found them alien to the
pair on the piazza. He was even self-reproachful that he saw with so little resentment Stella's
present companionship.

"While I don't like her course at all," he thought, "I must believe that she is acting from
the most self-sacrificing motives. What troubles me most now is that I have a growing sense
of the narrowness of her nature."

He had never come from her presence with his manhood aroused to its depths. It was her beauty
that he dwelt upon; her piquant, alluring tones and gestures. Madge was not an ill-natured
critic of the girl who threatened to destroy her future, but, by being simply what she was,
she made the other shrink and grow common by contrast.

To Graydon such comparisons were odious indeed, and he would not willingly permit them; but,
in conformity to mental laws and the force of circumstances, they would present themselves.
Each day had found him in the society of the two girls, and even an hour like one of those
just passed compelled him to feel the superiority of Madge. His best hope already for Stella
was that she would change when surrounded by better influences--that her faultless taste in
externals would eventually create repugnance to modes of thought and action unsuitable in a
higher plane of life. He did not question his love for her, but he felt this morning that it
was a love which was becoming disenchanted early, and into which the elements of patience and
tolerance might have to enter largely. Should he marry her to-day he could not, as Madge had
said, and with the first glow of affection, believe her perfect. He even sighed as he thought
of the future.

His heart was very tender toward Madge, but it was with an affection that seemed to him partly
fraternal, and partly a regard for one different, better, purer than himself. He proved the
essential fineness, the capabilities of his nature, by his appreciation of some of her higher
traits. Her ministry to the dying girl had given her a sacredness in his eyes. For the time
she was becoming a sort of religion to him. He revealed this attitude of mind to her by a gentle
manner, and a tone of respect and consideration in the least thing he said.

"Oh," thought the poor girl, "he could be so much to me and I to him! His touch, even in thought,
would never be coarse and unfeeling; and I have seen again and again that I can inspire him,
move him, and make him happy. Why must a wretched blunder thwart and blight two lives?"

Before they had finished their breakfast the beautiful languor of sleep was again in his companion's
eyes, and he said: "Dear Madge, promise me you will take a long rest. Before we part I want
to tell you what an illumined page you have put in my memory this morning. Some of the shadows
in the picture are very dark, but there is also a light in it that 'never was on sea or land.'
When you wake I shall be on my way to the trout-stream to which Dr. Sommers will guide me;
and, do you know? I feel as if my memories will be in accord with the scene of my camping-ground.
As I sit in my tent-door to-night I shall think over all you have said and described."

Her only answer was a smile, that for some reason quickened his pulse.

Much occurred before they met again.

He went to his room, wrote some letters, and made other preparations. Then, feeling that he
should give the remaining time before his departure to Miss Wildmere, he sought her. She appeared
to be waiting for him on the piazza, and there was reproach in her tone, as she said, "I half
feared you were going without bidding me good-by."

"Such fears were scarcely just to me."

"I did not know but that you had so greatly enjoyed your morning drive as to go away in a fit
of absent-mindedness. I have been sitting here alone an hour."

"I could not know that. When I drove up I saw that I should be de trop," he replied, as they
sauntered to an adjacent grove.

"Now, Graydon, you know that is never true, so far as I am concerned."

"The trouble is, Miss Wildmere, others are concerned in such a way that the only resource left
me is to keep my distance."

"Mr. Arnault has returned to the city," she said, with what appeared a great sigh of relief.
"I am perfectly free now."

"Till Mr. Arnault returns."

"I cannot help his return."

"Oh, no. I do not question his right to come back, or even to buy this hotel and turn us all out."

"Please don't talk about him any more. I'm doing the best I can."

"I believe you think so, but I cannot think it will prove the best for any one. It is not what
I expected or even imagined. You are acting from a mistaken sense of duty, and I am more sorry
every day that you can commit such an error. Look at it in its true light, Stella. I cannot
believe you are deceiving me: you must be leading Mr. Arnault to entertain a false hope."

"Graydon, I have refused Mr. Arnault, and he will take no refusal."

"You can refuse him in such a way that he must take it at once and forever."

"You don't know--" she began, tears coming into her eyes.

"No; you have only led me to surmise a great deal by implication."

"What would become of mamma and my little sister if papa should fail utterly?" and tears came
faster. No one could be more pathetic than Miss Wildmere when she chose.

"Can you not trust me for them as well as for yourself?"

"Oh, Mr. Muir, I know you mean most generously and kindly, but papa is so anxious and fearful!
He tries to keep up before others, but I know how he feels, and it's terrible. He is past middle
age, and business success means very much to him. How can I do anything to harm him? I know
so little about business and its perils, while papa thinks there may be terrible dangers ahead
for every one. You might have the good-will to help us and yet soon be scarcely able to help
yourself. I have been made to feel that the best I could do through these troublous times was
to try to aid papa as far as possible, and then I shouldn't have anything with which to reproach
myself."

Graydon was perplexed. Apparently she was doing wrong in the most self-sacrificing spirit,
and believed that doing right, which would end her abnegation, was wrong and selfish.

While he hesitated, she resumed: "You see, Graydon, papa has the same as said that Mr. Arnault
was tiding him over until he could realize on securities now of little value. Of course there
has been no compromising understanding in words--do not think us capable of that. It would
cut me to the heart to have you misjudge me or condemn me. I will give you the highest proof
I can of my--my--esteem by being frank on a delicate subject, so that you can see how I am
placed. I don't think many young ladies would do as much. Of course what I say is sacred between
us. Mr. Arnault offered himself long since, and I promptly declined the honor, but he laughingly
told me he would take no refusal, and chatted through the rest of the evening as pleasantly
as if nothing had happened. I have virtually refused him several times since, but he persists,
declaring that he will remain an agreeable friend until I change my mind. Surely, I am not
misleading him. I do like him as a friend, and he knows that I have for him no other regard,
and never had. Before you came he had begun to help papa, and to throw business in his way,
and just now he is rendering him very great service. He may do this in the hope of influencing
me, but he gives his aid without conditions. Yet I know him well enough to be sure that he
would withdraw this business help should I now harshly dismiss him or engage myself to another.
While I do show him that I appreciate his kindness, I do nothing to indicate that my feeling
is changed. He must know that I regard him in the same light as in the past. If he is content
with this, I have asked myself why I should be precipitate--why alienate him now in the very
crisis of papa's affairs. Of course if I had only myself to think of--I've been foolish enough
to think that I might help papa and still be happy in the end. Am I so very naughty, Graydon?"

He was at a loss how to answer her, but felt that he must at once disabuse her mind of one
expectation.

"I admit, Stella," he said, thoughtfully, "that you are peculiarly placed, and I thank you
for making clearer what I had partially surmised. While I admire and respect the motive, I
must still repeat that I regret beyond all words such action in one who is so much to me. It
is right also that I should define my own position more clearly. I will imitate your generous
frankness. You know how greatly I admired you before I first went abroad; and while I felt
that there was little chance for me, you being sought by so many, I did not give up hope. This
hope was strengthened by my visit last summer, and when I returned and found you free a few
weeks since I determined to win you if I could. You know I would have spoken before had you
permitted. I have for some little time felt myself irrevocably bound by what has passed between
us. I also believed that you would eventually give me a full explanation in regard to Mr. Arnault,
and that his attentions would cease. As to my not being able to take care of you, that is absurd.
I am not wealthy yet, but few young men in the city have better prospects. My brother's business
is large and profitable, and I am soon to share in it. I could not, from the nature of things,
enter into business relations with your father--I should not be at the head of the firm--but
neither you nor yours should ever want. As to my brother, he is in no financial danger whatever.
He has a large fortune, and is conservatism itself. If you are placed in an embarrassing position,
I am also. Arnault's manner is not that of a friend. Others misjudge you and me also. It looks
to the people here, and to my own family, as if you were playing with us both.

"Moreover," he continued, after a moment's thought, "you are drifting into a false relation
with Arnault, although you may not be conscious of it. Before these troubles began you simply
tolerated his attentions good-naturedly, and without any special motive. Now you have a definite
motive and purpose, and--pardon me, Stella--they are misleading him. He would not continue
his attentions an hour, did he believe they were utterly hopeless. To Arnault and all others
you appear undecided between him and myself. Such an experiment as you are trying cannot work
well. If he has any other power beyond that of your maidenly preference, he will not hesitate
to increase it, and may make your father more utterly dependent upon him while appearing helpful."

"Yes; I have thought of that," she said, musingly.

"There seems to me but one straightforward, high-toned thing for you to do, Stella, and that
is to follow your heart."

He was almost frightened at himself that he spoke with so little eagerness and longing. His
words seemed but the honorable and logical sequence of what had gone before. For some reason
this girl in the broad light of day did not appear to be the same as when she had fascinated
him in the witching moonlight the evening before. It was not that her beauty had gone with
the glamour of the night, but he had been breathing a different and a purer atmosphere. Madge
had been revealing what to him seemed ideal womanhood.

In regard to Stella his illusion had so far passed that he thought, consciously, "Even at her
best she is presenting Wildmere traits; her very self-sacrifice takes on a Wildmere form, and
there is a flavor of Wall Street in it all."

But he still believed that he loved her, and that, if she was equal to such great though mistaken
self-sacrifice for her father, she would, under his influence, throw off certain imperfections
and gain a better tone.

That such thoughts were passing through his mind was a bad omen for the continuance of Miss
Wildmere's power, and yet the opportunity of her life was still hers. She had simply to put
her hand into his with a look of trust, and abide by the act, to secure a loyalty that would
always have tried to promote her best interests. That she was strongly tempted to do this was
proved by her manner, in spite of the fact that she had promised Arnault not to decide against
him before Saturday.

It was a moment of indecision. His strong assurance that he was abundantly able to take care
of her, that Mr. Muir was wealthy and free from financial embarrassment, almost turned the
scale. She felt that both Arnault and her father were deceiving her for their own purposes,
and she had little hesitation in acting for herself without regard to them. Graydon's suggestion
that her action was not high-toned, although delicately made, touched her pride to the quick,
and she was compelled to feel during this interview, as never before, the superiority of the
man who addressed her. She longed to force Henry Muir to acknowledge the daughter of the man
he shunned in business; and not the least among her incentives was the thought of triumphing
over Madge as a possible rival.

"At any rate," she had thought, "if I become engaged to Graydon he will have to be very much
less fraternal. As to his not aiding papa," she concluded, "I can't help that. When once married
I could make him do all he could afford, and papa and mamma have no right to expect anything more."

To the potency of all these considerations was added a sentiment for the man who awaited her
answer, and who chafed inwardly that it was so long in coming.

"Truly," he thought, "this is a strange wooing. Henry himself could not more carefully weigh
the pros and cons than does she apparently, nor am I in feverish suspense. I had hoped for
something different in my mating."

A glimmering perception that her manner was not calculated to inspire a lover at last dawned
on Miss Wildmere, and with it came a faltering purpose to decide in favor of Graydon at once;
but as she turned toward him, to speak with what was meant to be a bewildering smile of joy,
a messenger from the office said, "A telegram, miss."

Graydon frowned, and then laughed outright. She stopped in the very act of tearing open the
envelope, and looked at him inquiringly.

"Oh, nothing," he said, lightly. "The opportuneness of that fellow's coming was phenomenal.
How much longer am I to wait for your decision, Stella? Were the world in our secret, I should
be known as St. Graydon the patient."

She flushed, but adopted his apparently light mood as the least embarrassing. "My memory is
good, and I shall know how to reward you," she smilingly replied. "Please let me satisfy my
mind about papa, for I'm sure it's from him."

"Oh, satisfy your mind fully about everything, Miss Wildmere."

She tore open the envelope with a strong gesture of impatience, and read, with a suddenly paling
cheek, "Unless you choose the immediate certainty of absolute loss, wait till I see you. Will
come soon. Wildmere."

She crushed the telegram in her hand, and turned away with a half-tragic air which at the moment
struck Graydon as a little "stagy," and then he condemned himself for the thought. As she did
not speak for a moment, he said, sympathetically, "Your tidings are bad?"

She tried to think, but was confused, and felt that she was in a cruel dilemma. Could Graydon
be deceiving her? or was he as ignorant as he seemed of his brother's peril? Was her father
in league with Arnault after all? and were they uniting to separate her from Graydon? She could
not tell. She must gain more time. She would see her father, charge him with duplicity, and
wring the truth from him.

When she turned to Graydon her eyes were full of tears again, and she faltered: "You may despise
me if you will, but my father has made an appeal to me, and is coming to see me. I must hear
what he has to say. I must tell him that I can't endure--that I can't go on this way any longer.
I would gladly help him, save him, but after what you have said it's impossible to--Oh, was
ever a girl placed in such wretched straits! Graydon, can you be patient a little longer?"

"There is nothing else for me to do, Stella. I only stipulate that your decision be made speedily,
and that Arnault be given to understand what my rights are. I shall have no difficulty in enforcing
them."

"I shall decide speedily. It is not right that I should be placed in such a torturing, humiliating
position."

"Now I agree with you perfectly. When does your father come?"

"He says 'soon.'"

"Very well; I will return on Saturday."

"I wish you wouldn't go away now," she entreated.

"I think it is best," replied Graydon, decisively, yet kindly. "I have said all that is possible
to an honorable man. By remaining I am placed in an anomalous position which my self-respect
does not permit any longer."

"I suppose," she sighed, "that I should not ask too much. Well, so be it, then."

They walked back to the house in silence. At the door of a side entrance she turned to him,
her face flushing at the admission, and said, hastily, "I waited a long time for you, Graydon,"
and then fled to her room.

"Oh, confound it!" he muttered, as he walked away. "What a muddle it all is! I ought to feel
like strangling myself for permitting this doubting, cynical spirit to creep over me. Curse
it all! her words and manner haven't the ring of absolute truth. It seems as if I heard a voice
in the very depths of my soul, saying, 'Beware!' Am I becoming an imbecile? I doubted and misjudged
Madge. Thank Heaven that is past forever! Now I am doubting and misjudging the woman I have
asked to be my wife. I must be misjudging her--the alternative is horrible. I can't escape
one conviction, however. It is turning out just as I expected and told her it would. Arnault's
aid to her father has been delusive, and Wildmere is deeper in the mire than ever. This is
a fine ending of my social career! The girl of my choice puts me off until she can end this
Wall Street business more satisfactorily. She must wait and hear her father's reasons for further
diplomacy before she can answer me. If Henry knew all this--But Madge, crystal Madge, won't
repeat what I said. I must risk the loss of her society also. Has her keen insight into character
enabled her to detect these Wildmere traits, and is this the cause of her antipathy? How simply
she said 'I couldn't do'--what Stella has accomplished with so much skill that the gossips
in the house are in honest doubt as to her choice, or whether, indeed, she proposes to accept
either Arnault or myself. Well, well, I'll wait till she has had this interview with her father,
and then she must either decide for me and against such tactics forever, or else she can wear
my scalp in her belt with those of the other unfortunates."

In an hour he was on the road with Dr. Sommers to a wild and secluded valley.

CHAPTER XXIX

THE ENEMIES' PLANS

It has been shown that Arnault believed the decisive period to have come that would see the
success or failure of his "operation" in the Catskills. Keen, penetrating, he had comprehended
the situation clearly. He knew that Stella wished to accept Graydon, and was held in check
by financial considerations only. He had seen her manner during the preceding moonlight evening,
and with intense anger had observed from a neighboring grove the episode in the summer-house.
The twig had not casually parted under his step, but had been snapped between his fingers.
Stella's quick alarm and flight had revealed the continuance of his hold upon her fears, if
not her heart. From that moment he dismissed all indecision. In bitterness he realized that
his prolonged stay in the mountains had not advanced his interests. He had hoped to win the
girl by devotion, keeping financial pressure in the background; she had been only suave, agreeable,
and elusive. He had told her that he expected her decision by Saturday evening; she had merely
bowed in a non-committal way. Meanwhile it was evident that if the Muirs kept up, apparently
retaining the power to pass unscathed to better times, she would prolong her hesitancy, and
in the end accept Graydon. He determined, therefore, to see her first, then her father, and
to call in his loan immediately.

While Graydon and Madge were returning next morning from the lonely farmhouse Arnault was breakfasting
at the hotel. He appeared in excellent spirits. Miss Wildmere's alert observation could not
detect from his manner his knowledge of the fact that she had been on the point of yielding
to Graydon the evening before. He was full of gallant courtesy toward her, and every glance
and word expressed admiration. This was always the breath of life to her, and while it had
ceased to give positive pleasure, its absence was like uncomfortable weather.

After the meal was over he led her to the same summer-house in which Graydon had almost spoken
words endowed with a lover's warmth and eagerness.

"Stella," he said, "I shall go to town on the ten-o'clock train."

"I supposed you had concluded to remain all the week," she replied.

"No; very important interests call me to the city, much to my regret. You only bowed when I
requested that I should receive a final answer before the close of this week. I shall return
Saturday. Will you end my suspense within this time?"

She was silent.

"Will you make me another promise, then? Will you remain free this week? If you will not bind
yourself to me, will you promise that no one else shall have a claim upon you until the time
specified expires?"

After some hesitation she said, "Yes, I will promise that."

"Please do so, and you will not regret it," was his quiet response.

"I am not so eager to be bound that I cannot promise so much."

"Very well then, I am content for the present;" and he changed the subject.

They soon returned to the piazza, and Arnault employed his utmost effort to be agreeable during
the brief time remaining.

Earlier in the week he had written Mr. Wildmere a letter, in consequence of which the momentous
telegram had restrained the daughter at the critical moment already mentioned.

When Madge came down to a late dinner she saw that Arnault had disappeared from the Wildmere
table, and that the belle was already a victim of ennui in the absence of both gentlemen. During
the afternoon Mrs. Muir was eager to gossip a little over the aspect of affairs, but soon found
that Madge would do scarcely more than listen.

"I don't understand that Miss Wildmere at all," said the elder sister; "late last evening she
went to yonder summer-house, hanging on Graydon's arm as if they were engaged or married, and
now he's gone to be absent several days. This morning she was there again with Arnault, and
he wasn't talking about the weather, either. Now he's gone also. Before Graydon went she had
another long interview with him while you were asleep. Good gracious! what is she aiming at?
Young men were not so patient in my day or in our village; and quiet as Henry appears, he wouldn't
play second string to a bow as Graydon does. When Miss Wildmere first came I thought it was
about settled, and I tried to be polite to one whom I thought we should soon have to receive.
Now it's a sort of neck-and-neck race between the two men. If Graydon wins, how shall you treat
Miss Wildmere?"

"Politely for Graydon's sake, of course."

"Whose chances are best?"

"Graydon's."

"Do you think she loves him?"

"Yes, as far as she can love any one.'

"Why, Madge, what do you mean?"

"She could not love as we should; she doesn't know what the word means. If she did she wouldn't
hesitate."

"You think Henry's opinion of her is correct, then?"

"I think he's right usually. Miss Wildmere is devoted to one being--herself."

"Why, Madge, it would be dreadful to have Graydon marry such a girl!"

"Graydon is not Harry Muir. He attained his majority some years since."

"He certainly is old enough to show more spirit. Well, I don't understand her tactics, but
such belles, I suppose, are a law unto themselves."

"Don't let us gossip about her any more. If Graydon becomes engaged there is only one thing
for us to do. Miss Wildmere has made herself disagreeable to me in many little nameless ways,
and we never could be friends, but I shall not give Graydon cause for just complaint. If he
asks me to see her with his eyes, I shall laugh at him and decline."

"They shall never live with us," said Mrs. Muir, emphatically. "I know I'm not a brilliant
and accomplished woman, but I have always made home a place of rest and comfort for Henry,
and I intend it always shall be just such a refuge. He is nervous and uncomfortable whenever
that girl comes near him. Some people can't get on together at all. I am so glad that he likes
you! He says you are one that a man could depend upon in all sorts of weather."

"We'll see; but I like Santa Barbara weather, which is usually serene."

"Oh, Madge, you'll not go there again?"

"Yes, I shall probably make it my home. I should never keep my health in the East, and I should
dread a winter in New York more than I can tell you."

"Well," said Mrs. Muir, discontentedly, "I suppose you will have your own way in everything
hereafter; but I think you might at least try to spend a winter with us."

"If there were cause I would, Mary, but you are happy in your home, and I am not greatly needed.
In my Western home I feel I can get the most out of life, just as you are getting the most
out of yours. I should suffer from my old troubles in New York." This statement was true enough
to both ladies, although a very prosaic impression was conveyed to Mrs. Muir's mind.

To Madge, Graydon's absence contained a strong element of hope. He would not have gone away
if all had been settled between him and Miss Wildmere, and, as Mary had said, there appeared
stronger evidence of uncertainty now than at first. Graydon had seen Miss Wildmere, and she
evidently had not finally dismissed Arnault.

Madge indulged in no idle brooding, however, and by activity every hour in the day, passed
the time bravely. One of her boy admirers had a horse, and became her escort on long excursions;
and with Mrs. Muir she went to see Tilly Wendall again on Friday morning. The poor girl was
very weak indeed, and could do little more than smile her welcome. Madge promised to spend
Sunday night with her. She would have come before, but Graydon had told her that he might return
Friday evening, and as a storm was threatening she thought it probable that he would hasten
back to avoid it. She believed that there was still hope for her, and determined that she should
never have cause in the future to reproach herself with lost opportunities. There was no imperative
call of duty to her sick friend, for Mrs. Wendall said that two or three neighbors had lately
offered their services.

Mrs. Muir was gladdened on her return to the hotel by a telegram from her husband, saying that
he would arrive on the late train and spend Saturday with her. She and Madge sat down to dinner
in a cheerful mood, which evidently was not shared by Miss Wildmere.

That brilliant young woman, although she made herself the centre of all things as far as possible,
was a victim of poverty when thrown upon her own resources. Madge detected her in suppressed
yawns, and had noted that she had apparently done little else than read novels since parting
with the two men who were metaphorically at her feet. Since the telegram she had not received
a word from her father or any one, and was inwardly chafing at the dead calm that had followed
her exciting experiences. She did not misinterpret the deceptive peace, however, and knew that
on the morrow she must decide what even she regarded as the most momentous question of life.
Persons under the dominion of pure selfishness escape many perplexities, however, and she was
prone to take short cuts to desired ends. Ready to practice deceit herself, she became more
strongly impressed that her father and Arnault were misleading her. Therefore she impatiently
awaited the former's appearance, that she might tax him with duplicity. Unless he had something
stronger than vague surmises to offer, she intended on the morrow to promise Graydon Muir to
be his wife.

As has been seen, Wildmere had too much conscience to try to sell his daughter outright, but
since she was in a mood for a bargain he had insured the possibility of one remarkably good
in his estimation, and was now on his way with very definite offers and statements indeed.

In the late afternoon Madge was speaking about a book to an acquaintance who said, "Go up to
my room and get it."

Madge was not sure whether she cared to read the book or not, and sat down to examine it. Suddenly
she heard distinctly the words, "I don't believe Henry Muir is in danger of failure. Graydon
scouted the idea. You and Arnault are seeking to mislead me."

Madge then remembered that the next room was occupied by Miss Wildmere, and her first impulse
was to make a noise, that the proximity of some one might be known, but like a flash came the
thought, "Chance may have put me in the way of getting information of vital importance to Henry;"
and the next sentence spoken assured her that this was true, for she heard a voice which she
recognized as Mr. Wildmere's say:

"In all human probability Muir will be compelled to suspend to-morrow. Mr. Arnault has placed
in his hands a call loan. You know what that is. Arnault is so alarmed about Muir's condition
that he will demand the money in the morning, and I am perfectly satisfied that Muir can't
raise it. You know enough about business to be aware of what will happen if he cannot. Such
is the market now that if Muir goes down he will be cleaned out utterly, and Graydon will have
to begin at the bottom like any other young man without resources. Of course, Arnault cannot
afford to lose the money, and must act like any other business man.

"But he did not send me here to tell you this. As his broker I know about it, and tell you
of my own accord. This is what he did authorize me to say to you. Had not business interests,
which have already suffered from his devotion to you, prevented, he would be here now to make
the offer in person. He says that he will settle upon you one hundred thousand dollars in your
own right the day you marry him, and also give you an elegant home in the city. Now what is
your answer?"

"When Henry Muir fails I'll believe all this," was the sullen reply.

"Be careful, Stella. Devoted as Arnault is he is not a man to be trifled with. He has made
you a munificent offer, but if you show this kind of spirit he is just the one to withdraw
at once and forever. If you love Graydon Muir well enough to share his poverty, I have not
another word to say, although I shall be homeless myself in consequence."

"Nonsense, papa! You have been on the eve of ruin more times than I can remember. Graydon assured
me that he was abundantly able to take care of me, and that his brother was in no danger. I
can have all the elegance I want and still follow my own inclination. If Henry Muir fails,
of course that ends the matter; and if he is to fail to-morrow it will be time enough to give
Mr. Arnault my answer to-morrow night, as he asked that I would. If I give him a favorable
one I prefer to do it in person, for I don't wish to appear mercenary. You, I hope, have the
sense to keep this phase out of view."

"Oh, certainly. Such high-minded people as we are should not be misjudged," was the bitter reply.

"One has to take the world as it is, and one soon learns that all are looking after their own
interests," was the cynical reply.

"A beautiful sentiment for one so young! Well, I must return to the city to-night, and I cannot
take your acceptance of Mr. Arnault's offer?"

"No. I will give my answer in person to-morrow night. I can either accede in a way that will
please him, or decline in a manner that will keep his friendship. I suppose you believe what
you say about Mr. Muir, but I am sure you are mistaken, and I have set my heart on marrying
Graydon."

"Your heart?" satirically.

She made no answer.

"You are taking no slight risk," he resumed, after a moment.

"Either Arnault is misleading you, or Graydon is deceiving me, and I would believe him in preference
to Arnault any day. I won't be duped."

"But I tell you, Stella, that under the circumstances Graydon's ignorance is not at all strange.
He has been absent; he is not in the firm; and what is swamping Muir is an investment outside
of his regular business."

"You yourself said within a month that if Henry Muir went through this business crisis he would
represent one of the strongest and wealthiest houses in the country. If he is in the danger
you assert, the fact will soon be manifested. Mr. Arnault has requested my answer to-morrow
night. I have not promised to give it; I have only promised him not to accept Graydon in the
meantime."

"The fact that Mr. Arnault is helping me so greatly counts for nothing, I suppose."

"Oh, yes; I appreciate it very much, but not enough to marry him unless I must. I am literally
following your advice--to choose between these two men. I shall convey to Mr. Arnault the impression
that I am deeply moved by the generosity of his offer. I am. Girls don't get such offers every
day. You can show him that the very fact of my hesitation proves that I am not mercenary; or
I can, when I see him. At the same time I am not at all satisfied that Graydon Muir's offer
is not a better one, and it is certainly more to my mind--if you don't like the word heart.
This fact, however, may as well not be mentioned."

After some moments' hesitation he said, slowly: "Very well, then. You are my daughter, although
a strange one, and I shall do as well for you as I can."

"Yes, please. I parted with sentiment long ago, but I can do well by those who do well by me.
I shall soon be off your hands, and then you won't have me to worry about."

He made no response, and Madge heard his step pass into his wife's room. A moment later Miss
Wildmere also departed, and her voice was soon heard on the piazza. The conversation had been
carried on in a comparatively low tone, and some words had been lost, but those heard made
the sense given above. Circumstances had favored Madge. The open window at which she was sitting
was near the next window in Miss Wildmere's room, and within two or three feet there was the
customary thin-panelled door which enables the proprietor to throw rooms together, as required,
for the accommodation of families. Therefore, without moving or volition on her part information
vital to her relatives had been brought to her knowledge. She was perfectly overwhelmed at
first, and sat as if stunned, her cheeks scarlet with shame for the act of listening, even
while she felt that for the sake of the innocent and unsuspecting, to whom she owed loyalty
and love, it was right. Soon, however, came the impulse to seek the refuge of her own room
and think of what must be done. She stepped lightly to the outer door; there was no sound in
the corridor, and with all the composure she could assume she passed quietly out and gained
her own apartment unobserved.

CHAPTER XXX

THE STRONG MAN UNMANNED

Madge locked her doors, bathed her hot face, then paced her room in great agitation, feeling
that not only her own happiness was in peril, but Graydon's also. Her mental distress was greatly
enhanced by a feeling that in order to save her relatives she herself had been guilty of what
to her sensitive nature appeared almost like a crime. "Well, I won't bother him with questions
until he comes round a bit. You, Zeally, had better step into my room though, and give me your
version of the affair."

But as the Corporal saluted and took a step forward, the prisoner opened his eyes.

"Before you examine Zeally, sir, let me save you what trouble I can." He spoke faintly, but with
deliberation. "I wish to deny nothing.

I was escaping, and he tracked me. He came on me as I cut across the park, and challenged. I did
not answer, but ran around a corner of the house and jumped the parapet, thinking to double
along the trench there and put him off the scent--at least to dodge the bullet, if he fired.
But as I jumped for it, he winged me. A very pretty shot, too. With your leave, sir, I 'd like to
shake hands with him on it. Shake hands, Corporal!" Raoul stretched out a hand, sideways.
"You're a smart fellow, and no malice between soldiers."

Dorothea heard Polly's gasp: it seemed to her that all the room must
hear it.

Her own hand trembled on the bandage. She had forgotten her danger--the all but inevitable scandal--until
Raoul brought it back to her, and in the same breath saved her by his heroic lie. She could
not profit by it, though.

Her lips parted to refute it, and for the first time she gazed up at him, her eyes brimming
with sudden love, gratitude, pride, even while they entreated against the sacrifice. He was smiling
down with an air of faint amusement; yet beneath the lashes she read a command which mastered
her will, imposed silence. He had taken on a new manliness, and for the first time in the story
of their loves she felt herself dominated by something stronger than passion. He had swept her off
her feet, before now, by boyish ardour: her humility, the marvel of being loved, had aided
him; but hitherto in her heart she had always felt her own character to be the stronger. Now
he challenged her on woman's own ground--that of self-abnegation; he commanded her to his own
hurt, he towered above her.

She had never dreamed of a love like this. Beaten, despairing for him, yet proud as she had never been
in her life, she held her breath.

Corporal Zeally was merely bewildered. His was a deliberate mind and had hatched out the night's
catastrophe after incubating it for weeks. Unconvinced by Polly's explanation of her meeting
with M. Raoul at the Nursery gate, he had nursed a dull jealousy
and set himself to watch, and had dogged his man down at length with
the slow cunning of a yokel bred of a line of poachers.

Raoul's tribute to his smartness perplexed him and almost he scented a trap.

"Beg your pardon, Squire," he began heavily, forgetting military forms of address, "but the gentleman
don't put it right."

"Oh, hang your British modesty!" put in Raoul with a wry laugh.

"If it pleases you to represent that the whole thing was accidental and you don't deserve
to be promoted sergeant for tonight's work, at least you might respect my vanity."

Polly saw her opportunity.

She crossed boldly and made as if to lay over the Corporal's mouth the hand that would fain
have boxed his ears. "Reckon this is my affair," she announced, with
an effrontery at which one of the footmen guffawed openly.

"Be modest as you please, my lad, when I've married 'ee; but I won't
put up with modesty from anyone under a sergeant, and that I warn
'ee!"

The Corporal eyed his sweetheart without forgiveness.

His mouth was open, but upon the word "sergeant," he shut it again and began to digest the idea.

"You
know, of course, sir," Endymion Westcote addressed the prisoner coldly, "to what such a confession
commits you?

I do not see what other construction the facts admit, but it is so serious in itself and in
its consequences that I warn you--"

"I have broken my parole, sir," said Raoul, simply. "Of the temptations you cannot judge. Of
the shame I am as profoundly sensible as you can be. The consequences I am ready to suffer."

He sank back in his chair as Dr. Ibbetson entered.

An hour later Dorothea said goodnight to her brother in the great hall. He had lit his candle and
was mixing himself a glass of brandy and water.

"The sight of blood--" he excused himself. "I am sorry for the fellow, though I never liked
him. I suppose, now, there was nothing between him and that girl Polly? For a moment--from
Zeally's manner--" He gulped down the drink. "His confession was honest enough, anyhow. Poor
fool! he's safe in hospital for a week, and his friends, if he has any, and they know what
it means, will pray for that week to be prolonged."

"What does it mean?" Dorothea managed to ask.

"It means Dartmoor."

Dorothea's candlestick shook in her hand, and the extinguisher fell on the floor. Her brother picked
it up and restored it.

"Naturally," he murmured with brotherly concern, "your nerves! It has been a trying night, but
you comported yourself admirably, Dorothea.

Ibbetson assures me he could not have tied the bandage better himself. I felt proud of my sister."
He kissed her gallantly and pulled out his watch. "Past twelve o'clock!--time they were round
with the barouche. The sooner we get Master Raoul down to the Infirmary and pack him in bed,
the better."

As Dorothea went up the stairs she heard the sound of wheels on the
gravel.

She could not accept his sacrifice. No; a way must be found to save him, and in her prayers that
night she began to seek it. But while she prayed, her heart was bowed over a great joy. She
had a hero for a lover!

CHAPTER IX

DOROTHEA CONFESSES

She saw no more of him, and heard very little, before the Court Martial met. No one acquainted with
the code of that age--so strait-laced in its proprieties, so full-blooded in its vices--will
need to be told that she never dreamed of asking her brother's permission to visit the Prisoners'
Infirmary.

He reported--once a day, perhaps, and casually-- that the patient was doing well. Dorothea
ventured once to sound General Rochambeau, but the old aristocrat answered stiffly that he took
no interest in déclassés, and plainly hinted that, in his judgment,
M. Raoul had sinned past pardon; which but added to her remorse.

From time to time she obtained some hearsay news through Polly; but
Polly's chief interest now lay in her approaching marriage.

For the Commissary, while accepting Raoul's version of his capture,
had an intuitive gift which saved him from wholly believing in it.

Indeed, his conduct of the affair, if we consider the extent of his
knowledge, was nothing less than masterly.

Corporal Zeally found himself a sergeant within forty-eight hours, and within an hour of the
announcement he and Polly were given an audience in the Bayfield library, with the result that
Parson Milliton cried their banns in Axcester Church on the following Sunday, and the bride-elect
received a month's wages and three weeks' notice of dismissal, with a hint that the reason for
her short retention--to instruct her successor in Miss Dorothea's ways--was ostensible rather
than real. With Raoul's fate he declined to meddle.

"Here," he said in effect, "is my report, including the prisoner's
confession.

I do my simple duty in presenting it.

But the young man was captured in my grounds; he was known to be
a protégé of my brother's. Finding him wounded and faint with loss
of blood, we naturally did our best for him, and this again renders
me perhaps too sympathetic.

The law is the law, however, and must take its course."

No attitude could have been more proper or have shown better feeling.

So Raoul, who made a rapid recovery--barring the limp which he carried to the end of his days--was
tried, condemned, and sentenced in the space of two hours.

He stuck to his story, and the court had no alternative. Dartmoor or Stapleton inevitably awaited
the prisoner who broke parole and was retaken. The night after his sentence Raoul was marched
past the Bayfield gates under escort for Dartmoor. And Dorothea had
not intervened.

This, of course, proves that she was of no heroical fibre. She knew it. Night after night she had
lain awake, vainly contriving plans for his deliverance; and either she lacked inventiveness
or was too honest, for no method could she discover which avoided
confession of the simple truth.

As the days passed without catastrophe and without news save that her lover was bettering in
hospital, she staved off the truth, trusting that the next night would bring inspiration. Almost
she hoped--being quite unwise in such matters--that his sufferings would be accepted as cancelling
his offence. So she played the coward. The blow fell on the evening when Endymion announced,
in casual tones, that the Court Martial was fixed for the day after
next.

That night, indeed, brought something like an inspiration; and on the morrow she rode into Axcester
and called upon Polly, now a bride of six days' standing and domiciled in one of the Westcote
cottages in Church Street, a little beyond the bridge. For a call of state this was somewhat
premature, but it might pass.

Polly appeared to think it premature. Her furniture was topsy-turvy, and her hair in curl-papers;
she obviously did not expect visitors, and resented this curtailment of the honeymoon. She showed
it even when Dorothea, after apologies, came straight to the point:

"Polly, I am very unhappy."

"Indeed, Miss?"

"You know that I must be, since M. Raoul is going to that horrible war-prison rather than let
the truth be known."

"But since you didn't encourage him, Miss--"

"Of course I didn't encourage him to come," said Dorothea, quickly.

"Why then it was his own fault, and he broke his word by breaking bounds."

"Yes, strictly his parole was broken; but the meaning of parole is, that a prisoner promises to
make no attempt to escape.

M. Raoul never dreamed of escaping, yet that is the ground of his
punishment."

"Well," said Polly, "if he chooses to say he was escaping, I don't
see how we--I mean, how you--can help."

"Why, by telling the truth; and that's what we ought to do, though
it was wrong of him to expose us to it."

"To be sure it was," Polly assented.

"But," urged Dorothea, "couldn't we tell the truth of what happened
without anyone's wanting to know more?

He gave you a note, which you took without guessing what it contained. He wished to have speech
with me. Before you could give me the note and I could refuse to see him-- as I should certainly
have done--he had arrived.

His folly deserves punishment, but no such punishment as being sent to Dartmoor."

Polly eyed her ex-mistress shrewdly.

"Have you burnt the note?" she asked.

Dorothea, blushing to the roots of her hair, stammered:

"No; I kept it--it was evidence for him, you see. I wish, now--"

She broke off as Polly nodded her head.

"I guessed you'd have kept it. And now you'll never make up your mind to burn it. You're too
honest."

"But, surely the note itself would not be called for?"

"I don't know. Folks ask curious questions in courts of law, I've always heard. Beggin' your pardon,
Miss, but your face tells too many tales, and anyone but a fool would ask for that note before
he'd been dealing with you three minutes. If he didn't, he'd ask you what was in it. And then
you'd be forced to tell lies--which you couldn't, to save your soul!"

Dorothea knew this to be true. She reflected a moment. "I should decline to show it, or to answer."

Mrs.
Zeally thought it about time to assert herself. "Very good, Miss. And now, how about me? They'd
ask me questions, too; and I'd have you consider, Miss Dorothea,
that though not shaken down to it yet--not, as you might say, in a
state to expect callers or make them properly welcome--I'm a respectable
married woman.

I don't mind confessing to you, Zeally isn't a comfortable man.

He's pleased enough to be sergeant, though he don't quite know how it came about; and he's that
sullen with brooding over it, that for sixpence he'd give me the strap to ease his feelings.
I ain't complaining. Mr. Endymion chose to take me on the hop and
hurry up the banns, and I'm going to accommodate myself to the man.

He's three-parts of a fool, and you needn't fear but I'll manage him.

But I ain't for taking no risks, and that I tell you fair."

Dorothea was stunned. "You don't mean to say that Zeally suspects you?"

"Why, of course he does!" said Polly. Prudence urged her to repeat that Zeally was three-parts of
a fool; but, being nettled, she spoke the words uppermost: "Who d'ee think he'd suspect?"

Dorothea, however, was too desperately dejected to feel the prick of this shaft. "You will
not help me, then?" was all her reply to it.

"Why, no, Miss! if you put it in that point-blank way. A married woman's got to think of her
reputation first of all."

Polly's attitude might be selfish, unfeeling; but the fundamental incapacity for gratitude in girls
of Polly's class will probably surprise and pain their mistresses
until the end of the world.

After all, Polly was right.

An attempt to clear Raoul by telling the superficial truth must involve terrible risks, and
might at any turn enforce a choice between full confession and falsehood.

Dorothea could not bring herself to lie, even heroically; and there
would be no heroism in lying to save herself.

On the other hand, the thought of a forced confession--it might he before a tribunal--was too hideous.
No, the suggestion had been a mad one, and Polly had rightly thrown
cold water on it.

Also, it had demanded too much of Polly, who could not be expected to jeopardise her matrimonial
prospects to right a wrong for which she was not in truth responsible.

Dorothea loved a hero, but knew she was no heroine.

She called herself a pitiful coward--unjustly, because, nurtured as she had been on the proprieties,
surrounded all her days by men and women of a class most sensitive to public opinion, who feared
the breath of scandal worse than a plague, confession for her must mean a shame unspeakable. What!
Admit that she, Dorothea Westcote, had loved a French prisoner almost young enough to be her son!
that she had given him audience at night! that he had been shot and
captured beneath her window!

Unjustly, too, she accused herself, because it is the decision, not
the terror felt in deciding, which distinguishes the brave from the
cowardly.

If you doubt the event with Dorothea, the fault, must be mine. She was timid, but she came of a race
which will endure anything rather than the conscious anguish of doing
wrong.

Nor, had her conscience needed them, did it lack reminders.

Narcissus had been persuaded to send the drawings to London to be
treated by lithography, a process of which he knew nothing, but to
which M. Raoul, during his studies in Paris, had given much attention,
and apparently not without making some discoveries--unimportant perhaps,
and such as might easily reward an experimenter in an art not well
past its infancy.

At any rate, he had drawn up elaborate instructions for the London
firm of printers, and when the proofs arrived with about a third of
these instructions neglected and another third misunderstood, Narcissus
was at his wits' end, aghast at the poorness of the impressions, yet
not knowing in the least how to correct them.

He gave Dorothea no peace with them.

Evening after evening she was invited to pore upon the drawings over which she and her lover had bent
together; to criticise here and offer a suggestion there; while every line revived a memory,
inflicted a pang.

What suggestion could she find save the one which must not be spoken?--to send, fetch the artist
back from Dartmoor, and remedy all this, with so much beside!

"But," urged Narcissus, "you and he spent hours together. I quite understood that he had explained
the process to you, and on the strength of this I gave it too little
attention.

Of course, if one could have foreseen--" He broke off, and added with some testiness: "I'd give
fifty pounds to have the fellow back, if only for ten minutes' talk."

"But why couldn't we?" Dorothea asked suddenly, breathlessly.

They
were alone by the table under the bookcase. On the far side of the
hall, before the fire, Endymion dozed after a long day with the partridges.
Narcissus's words awoke a wild hope.

"But why couldn't we?" she repeated,
her voice scarcely louder than a whisper.

"Well, that's an idea!"
he chuckled. "Confound the fellow, he imposed on all of us! If we
had only guessed what he intended, we might have signed a petition
telling him how necessary he had made himself, and imploring him,
for our sakes, to behave like a gentleman."

"But supposing--supposing
he was innocent--that he had never meant--" She put out a hand to
lay it on her brother's. "Hush!" she could have cried; but it was
too late.

"Endymion!" Narcissus called across the room, jocosely.

"Eh!
What is it?" Endymion came out of his doze.

"We're in a mess with
these drawings, a complete mess; and we want Master Raoul fetched
out of Dartmoor to set us right. Come now--as Commissary, what'll
you take to work it for us? Fifty pounds has already been offered."

Dorothea
turned from the table with a sigh for her lost chance.

"He'd like
it," answered Endymion, grimly. "But, my dear fellow,"-- he slewed
himself in his chair for a look around the hall,--"pray moderate your
tones. I particularly deprecate levity on such matters within possible
hearing of the servants; that class of person never understands a
joke."

Narcissus rubbed the top of his head--a trick of his in perplexity.

"But,
seriously: it has only this moment occurred to me. Couldn't the drawings
be conveyed to him, in due form, through the Commandant of the Prison?
The poor fellow owes us no grudge. I believe he would be eager to
do us this small service. And, really, they have made such a mess
of the stones--"

"Impossible! Out of the question! And I may say
now, and once for all, that the mention of that unhappy youth is repugnant
to me. By good fortune, we escaped being compromised by him; and I
have refrained from reminding you that your patronage of him was,
to say the least, indiscreet."

"God bless me! You don't suggest,
I hope, that I encouraged him to escape!"

"I suggest nothing. But
I am honestly glad to be quit of him, and take some satisfaction in
remembering that I detested the fellow from the first. He had too
much cleverness with his bad style, or, if you prefer it, was sufficiently
like a gentleman to be dangerous. Pah! For his particular offence,
I would have had the old hulks maintained in the Hamoaze, with all
their severities; as it is, the posturer may find Dartmoor pretty
stiff, but will yet have the consolation of herding with his betters."

Strangely
enough this speech did more to fix Dorothea's resolve than all she
had read or heard of the rigours of the war-prison. Gently reared
though she was, physical suffering seemed to her less intolerable
than to be unjustly held in this extreme of scorn.. This was the deeper
wrong; and putting herself in her lover's place, feeling with his
feelings, she knew it to be by far the deeper. In Dartmoor he shared
the sufferings of men unfortunate but not despicable, punished for
fighting in their country's cause. But here was a moral punishment,
deserved by none but the vilest; and she had helped to bring it--was
allowing it to rest--upon a hero!

In the long watches of that night
it never occurred to her that the brutality of her brother's contempt
was over-done. And Endymion, not given to self-questioning at any
time, was probably unconscious of a dull wrath revenging itself for
many pin-pricks of Master Raoul's clever tongue. Endymion Westcote,
like many pompous men, usually hurt somebody when he indulged in a
joke, and for this cause, perhaps, had a nervous dislike of wit in
others. Dull in taking a jest, but almost preternaturally clever in
suspecting one, he had disliked Raoul's sallies in proportion as they
puzzled him. The remembrance of them rankled, and this had been his
bull-roar of revenge.

He spent the next morning in his office; and
returning at three in the afternoon, retired to the library to draw
up the usual monthly report required of him as Commissary. He had
been writing tor an hour or more, when Dorothea tapped at the door
and entered.

Endymion did not observe her pallor; indeed, he scarcely
looked up.

"Ah! You have come for a book? Make as little noise, then,
as possible, that's a good soul. You interrupted me in a column of
figures."

He began to add them up afresh, tapping the table with
the fingers of his left hand, as his custom was when counting. Dorothea
waited. The addition made, he entered it, resting three shapely finger-tips
on the table's edge for the number to be carried over.

"I wish to
speak with you particularly."

He laid down his pen resignedly. Her
voice was urgent, and he knew well enough that the occasion must be
urgent when Dorothea interrupted his work.

"Anything wrong?"

"It--it's
about M. Raoul."

His eyebrows went up, but only to contract again
upon a magisterial frown.

"Really, after the request I was obliged
to make to Narcissus last night--you were present, I believe? Is it
possible that I failed to make plain my distaste?"

"Ah, but listen!
It is no question of distaste, but of a great wrong.

Madge retired early to prepare for her journey. Mrs. Muir soon followed, and her husband remarked
that he would merely remain down long enough to write a note to Graydon. This missive was brief,
but was charged with dynamite.

On the morrow, long before Miss Wildmere waked from the golden dreams which that day should
realize, Madge and Mr. Muir were on their way to the city. The young girl had said: "Don't
let us do anything by halves. I have read that in the crisis of a battle timid measures are
often fatal. Let me give you everything that you can use as collateral. How much is there?"

"Sixty thousand available at once. As I have said, you shall have your own way."

"Well, for once a woman is wiser than Solomon."

They went immediately to the trust company which had her property in keeping, and, having complied
with the forms, obtained the entire sum, then parted on Broadway, to rendezvous at the train.
Mr. Muir gave the radiant girl a look which she valued more than the money. He then went to
his bank. The official whom he accosted had been rather cold and shy of late, but when he received
the securities he grew perceptibly urbane.

On reaching his office Mr. Muir found that a transaction which had been greatly delayed was
now consummated, and that another ten thousand in cash was available. This also was sent to
the bank at once. Several business men were present when a confidential clerk from Arnault
appeared, and asked for a private interview.

"Well, really you must excuse me to-day. I'm very busy, and expect to leave town in an hour
or two. Please state what you have to say in few words, or else I will see you next week."

"Mr. Arnault," began the clerk, in a metallic tone, "says that he is compelled to call in the
loan he recently made you."

"Oh, certainly, certainly! Have you the securities I gave him as collateral?"

"No, sir, but I can get them," said the man.

"Do so, and I will give you my check. Thank Mr. Arnault for the accommodation, and say I have
thirty or forty thousand to spare should he be hard pressed. Be quick."

The Wall Street men present looked at one another significantly, and one of them remarked,
"You are forehanded for these times, Muir."

"If this absurd lack of confidence would only pass," was the careless reply, "I should have
more money on hand than I could invest profitably;" and then he appeared absorbed in other matters.

Arnault received the message from his clerk with something like dismay, and turning on Mr.
Wildmere, who was present, he said, almost savagely, "You have been misleading me."

"Indeed I have not, sir--not intentionally. I can't understand it."

"Well, I can. Muir is an old fox in business. I was a fool to think that a paltry thirty thousand
would trouble him. Well, there is nothing to do but to close the matter up."

"What, in regard to my daughter?" said Mr. Wildmere, inadvertently.

"Oh, no; confound it! What has she got to do with this affair?" replied Arnault, with an irritation
that he could not disguise. "I certainly have made Miss Wildmere a fair offer; some would regard
it as more. I shall go up to-night and receive her answer, as I promised. I am one who never
fails in a promise to man or woman, and I am ready to make good all that I have authorized
you to say to your daughter, and more."

"Let me add," said Mr. Wildmere, with some assumption of dignity, "that as far as I have influence
it is absolutely yours. I have ever prided myself on my fidelity to those who trust me."

"Thanks," replied Arnault, with a little menacing coldness in his tone. "I hope I shall have
proof of the fact this evening. If so, all shall go swimmingly."

Poor Wildmere bowed himself out with trepidation at heart, and Arnault followed him with a
dark look, muttering, "Let them both beware."

Mr. Muir met Madge at the depot, and was quietly jubilant. Both laughed heartily over the experiences
of the day.

"You are a blessed little woman, Madge. I was never so off my balance before in my life as
I was last night. When confused and upset, it is one of my impulses to stick to some principle
of right, like a mule. Bless you, I think I have secured you twice over! I have given you a
lien on property worth two hundred thousand in ordinary times."

"You have taught me to lean on you once more, Henry, and that is worth more than all your other
liens."

Mr. Arnault now appeared, and came affably forward, saying, "I am glad my enforced action did
not incommode you to-day."

"Thank you. I trust you are not in trouble, Mr. Arnault;" and there was a world of quiet satire
in the remark.

"Oh, no--only a temporary need, I assure you," was the hasty reply.

"So I supposed;" and as Arnault turned away, the speaker gave Madge a humorous glance, which
made her look of demure innocence difficult to maintain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Graydon had enjoyed fair success in fishing, and yet had not been supremely happy. He found,
with the venerated Izaak Walton, that the "gentle art" was conducive to contemplation; but
there were certain phases in his situation that were not agreeable to contemplate. As he followed
the trout-stream amid the solitudes of nature, the artificial and conventional in life grew
less attractive. In spite of his efforts to the contrary, Miss Wildmere seemed to represent
just these phases. He recalled critically and dispassionately all the details of their past
acquaintance, and found, with something like dismay, that she had exhibited only the traits
of a society belle--that he could recall no new ideas or inspiring thoughts received from her.
The apparent self-sacrifice for her father, which he had so unequivocally condemned, was, after
all, about the best thing he knew of her. The glamour of her beauty had been upon his eyes,
and he had credited her with corresponding graces of heart and mind. What evidence had he of
their existence?

The more he thought of it, the more his pride, also, rebelled at the ignominious position in
the background that he was compelled to take while the Wall Street diplomacy was prolonged.
At last, in anger and disgust, he resolved that, if he found Arnault in his old position by
Stella's side, he would withdraw at once and forever.

After all, although he was as yet unconscious of it, the secret of his clarified vision was
the influence of Madge upon his mind. She seemed in harmony with every beautiful aspect of
nature--true and satisfying, while ever changing. Madge was right: the mountains, streams,
rocks, and trees became her allies, suggesting her and not Miss Wildmere. He would have returned,
for the pleasure of her society, but for his purpose not to appear again until Arnault should
have time to arrive from the city and resume his attentions. If they were received as in the
past, he would write to Miss Wildmere his withdrawal of further claims upon her thoughts.

It was with something like bitter cynicism that he saw his illusions in regard to Miss Wildmere
fade, and when he drove up to the hotel after nightfall on Saturday, he was not sure that he
cared much what her answer might be, so apathetic had he become. The force of his old regard
was not wholly spent; but in his thoughts of her, much that was repugnant to his feelings and
ideals had presented itself to his mind, and he felt that the giving up of his dream of lifelong
companionship with her would almost bring a sense of relief. Without pausing to analyze the
reason of his eagerness to see Madge and hear of her welfare, he ran up at once to Mrs. Muir's
room.

"Madge went to New York!" he echoed, in surprise at Mrs. Muir's information.

"Yes; why not? She went to do some shopping for herself and me. Miss Wildmere's here, and,
for a wonder, Mr. Arnault is not. What more could you ask?"

"Hang Mr. Arnault--" He had come near mentioning both in his irritation.

"When will Madge and Henry arrive?"

"Soon now--on the nine-o'clock train. Oh, by the way, Henry left a note for you!"

"Very well. I'll go to my room, dress, and meet them."

"He is asking after Madge rather often, it seems to me. She doesn't compare so very unfavorably
with the speculator, after all, even in his eyes."

On reaching his room he threw himself wearily into a chair, and carelessly tore open his brother's
note. Instantly he bounded to his feet, approached the light more closely, and saw in his brother's
unmistakable hand the following significant words:

"Read this letter carefully and thoughtfully; then destroy it. Show your knowledge of its contents
by neither word nor sign. Be on your guard, and permit no one to suspect financial anxieties.
Arnault and Wildmere have struck me a heavy blow. The former has lent me money. I must raise
a large sum in town, but think I can do it, even in the brief time permitted. If I cannot we
lose everything. If I don't have to suspend to-morrow Miss Wildmere will accept you in the
evening. She has been waiting till those two precious confederates, her father and Arnault,
did their worst, so that she could go over to the winning side. You are of course your own
master, but permit me, as your brother, affectionately and solemnly to warn you. Stella Wildmere
will never bring you a day's happiness or peace. She loves herself infinitely more than you,
her father, or any one else. Be true to me, and you shall share my fortunes. If you follow
some insane notion of being true to her, you will soon find you have been false to yourself.
Again I warn you. Speak to no one of all this, and give no sign of your knowledge. HENRY."

Graydon read this twice, then crushed the paper in his hand as he muttered, "Fool, dupe, idiot!
Now at last I understand her game and allusions. She was made to fear that Henry was about
to fail, and she would not accept me until satisfied on this point. Great God! my infatuation
for her has been inciting Arnault in these critical times to break my brother down, and her
father has been aiding and abetting, in order that I might be removed out of the way. She was
so false herself that she suspected her own father, also Arnault, of deceiving her, and so
kept putting me off, that she might learn the truth of their predictions or the result of their
efforts. How clear it all becomes, now that I have the key! Well, I should be worse than a
heathen if I did not thank God for such an escape."

CHAPTER XXXII

MADGE IS MATTER-OF-FACT

"Well, I have come back to civilization and all its miseries," thought Graydon. "I was among
scenes that know not Wildmeres or Arnaults. 'Oh, my prophetic soul!' I felt that there was
something wrong, in spite of her superb acting. Sweet Madge, dear sister Madge, as you ever
will be to me, the more I think of it the more clearly I see that you are the one who first
began to shatter my delusion. Since that morning when I brought you home from your long vigil,
and you revealed to me your true, brave heart Stella Wildmere has never seemed the same, and
the revolt of my nature has been growing ever since."

His wish now was to avoid seeing every one until he had met his brother. While the thought
of his escape was uppermost in his mind, he was consumed with anxiety to learn the result of
Henry's efforts in town. His commercial instincts were also very strong, and the thought of
what might happen fairly made him tremble.

He slipped down a back stairway and out into the darkness, then bent his rapid steps to the
depot, at which he arrived half an hour before the train was due. Remembering that excited
pacing up and down there would not be very intelligent obedience to his brother's injunctions,
he started down a country road in the direction from which the train would come, and paced
to and fro in his strong excitement. At last the train arrived, and his first glimpse of Henry's
face and Madge's was reassuring. The moment the former saw him he called out, "Hello, Graydon!
Have you a trout supper for us?"

"Yes," was the hearty response; and he hastened forward and shook hands cordially, saying,
in an aside, "Oh, Madge! I am so glad to see you again!"

"You are! Tell that to the marines. The length of your stay proves it to be a fish story."

"Here, Madge, we'll put you in the stage. I'll rest myself by walking to the house with Graydon."

"Henry, you are all right?" said Graydon, eagerly, as soon as they were out of earshot.

"Yes," was the quiet reply; "I raised the money, paid Arnault in full, and have a good surplus
in the bank."

"Thank Heaven! How did you raise it? How has all this knowledge reached--"

"Patience, Graydon, patience. As soon as you are in the firm I shall have no secrets from you.
Until you are, you must let me manage in my old way."

"I have indeed little claim on your confidence. I have been deceived, and have acted like a
fool. But it's all over now. Henry, you may not believe me, but my nonsense would have ended
to-night if I hadn't received your letter, and all this had not occurred. I had been disgusted
with this Arnault business for some time, and had let Miss Wildmere know my views. As I thought
it over while away it all grew so detestable to me that I resolved, if Arnault appeared again
and renewed his attentions, I would never renew mine. He's here again, as you may have seen."

"Oh, yes; and I have talked with him. Please show no resentment. I obtained my information
in a way unknown to him, and there is nothing unusual in our transaction on its face. How was
it that you began to grow critical toward Miss Wildmere?"

"Well, I don't mind telling you. There was not a ring of truth or a stamp of nobility about
her words and manner, and I have been associating with a girl who is truth itself and twice
as clever and accomplished. Miss Wildmere was growing commonplace in contrast. I learned to
love Madge as a sister before she went away, and now no man ever admired and loved a sister more."

Mr. Muir smiled broadly to himself in the darkness, and said: "Truly, Graydon, you are giving
satisfactory proofs of returning sanity. We may as well conclude with the old saying, 'All's
well that ends well.'"

"I think I had better go to town Monday and resume business. It's time I did something to retrieve
myself."

"No, Graydon, not yet. I have everything in hand now, and believe the tide has turned. I realized
ten thousand to-day on a transaction that I will tell you about. I am not doing much business
now, only watching things and waiting. It was the suddenness of Arnault's demand that worried
me--on Saturday, too, you know. He had about the same as said that I might have the money as
long as I wanted it, and I should not have needed it much longer. In ordinary times I wouldn't
have given it a thought.

"You can help me more up here. It's growing warm, and Jack isn't improving as I would like.
After what has occurred I don't wish Mary and Madge to meet these Wildmeres any longer, so
I propose that you and Madge go to the Kaaterskill Hotel on Monday and explore. If you like
the place, then you can take Mary and the children there. I've had a little scare in town,
and propose to realize on some more property and make myself perfectly safe. By going to a
higher-priced hotel we increase our credit also, and add to the impression I made to-day, that
we are in no danger."

As the stage drew near the piazza Graydon hastened forward to help Madge out. In doing so he
saw Miss Wildmere greeting Arnault cordially. As he passed up the steps with Madge, he caught
Stella's swift, appealing look at him. He only bowed politely and passed on. It was Madge's
triumphal entry now by the same door at which she had seen him enter with Miss Wildmere but
a few weeks before. How complete her triumph was, even Madge did not yet know. While she went
to her room he sought the office and ordered some of the trout he had caught to be prepared
for supper. As he stood there Miss Wildmere left Arnault's side, and said, "Mr. Muir, are you
not going to shake hands with me?"

"Why, certainly, Miss Wildmere;" but there was little more than politeness in his tone and
manner. As there were many coming and going, she drew away with a reproachful glance. "So long
as Arnault is with me, he will not be cordial," was her thought.

She looked around for her father, but he, nervous and apprehensive, had disappeared. He felt
that if he should be compelled to disclose the failure of his predictions, she would pass into
one of her sullen, unmanageable moods. He feared that things were beyond his control, and decided
to let the young men manage for themselves. He was not, however, exceedingly solicitous. He
hoped that Arnault, aided by the influence of his munificent offer, would have the skill to
push his suit to a prompt conclusion; but he believed that, if this suitor should be dismissed,
Graydon would not fail his daughter, and that all might yet end well for her, and perhaps for
himself.

The supper-room was again occupied by the late comers, many of whom were accompanied by their
families and friends. Mr. Muir's quiet eyes fairly beamed over the group gathered at his table,
and he felt that but few moments of his life compared with those now passing. Twenty four hours
before he had seen himself drifting helplessly on a lee shore, but a little hand had taken
the helm when he had been paralyzed, and now he saw clear sea-room stretching away indefinitely,
with a turning tide and favoring gales. The terrible evils threatening him and his had been
averted. The results of his lifework would not be swept away, his idolized commercial standing
could now be maintained, his wife's brow remain unclouded by care, his children be amply provided
for, Graydon saved from a worse fate than financial disaster, and, last but not least, the
young fellow would be cured by Madge of all future tendencies toward the Wildmere type. He
never could think of this hope without smiling to himself. He had at last obtained the explanation
of Madge's effort and success. By the superb result he measured the strength of the love which
had led to it. "Great Scott!"--his favorite expletive--he had thought; "what a compass there
is in her nature! I had long suspected her secret, but when I touched upon it last night she
made my blood tingle by her magnificent resentment. I would sooner have trifled with an enraged
empress. Look at her now, smiling, serene, and, although not in the least artful, keeping all
her secrets with consummate art. Who would imagine that she was capable of such a volcanic
outburst? If Graydon does not lay siege to her now, the name of the future firm should be Henry
Muir and idiot."

That sagacious young man did not appear at all blighted by the wreck of the hope he had cherished.
He turned no wistful glances toward the girl who had so long satisfied his eyes, and, as he
had believed, his heart. He felt much the same as if he had been imposed upon by a cunning
disguise. Unknown to her, he had caught a glimpse of what the mask concealed, and his soul
was shuddering at the deformities to which he had so nearly allied himself. Her very beauty,
with its false promise, had become hateful to him.

"She is indeed a speculator," he thought, "and I'm a little curious to see how she will continue
her game." It afforded him vindictive amusement that she often, yet furtively, turned her eyes
toward him as if he were still a factor in it.

She never looked once in Graydon's direction but that Arnault was aware of the act. There was
no longer any menace in his deportment toward her--he was as devoted as the place and time
would permit--but in his eyes dwelt a vigilance and a resolution which should have given her
warning.

After supper Mr. and Mrs. Muir found a comfortable nook on the piazza, and the banker smoked
his cigar with ineffable content.

"Do you feel too tired for a waltz, Madge?" Graydon asked.

"The idea! when I've rested in the cars half a day."

"Oh, Madge!" he whispered; "dear, sweet little friend--you know I mean sister, only I dare
not say it--I'm so glad to be with you again! What makes you look so radiant to-night? You
look as though you had a world of happy thoughts behind those sparkling eyes."

"Nonsense, Graydon! You are always imagining things. I have youth, good health, have had my
supper--a trout supper, too--and I like to dance, just as a bird enjoys flying."

"You seem a bird-of-paradise. Happy the man who coaxes you into his cage! Brother or not, when
your beaux become too attentive they will find me a perfect dragon of a critic."

"When I meet my ideal, you shall have nothing to say."

"I suppose not. I am at a loss to know where you will find him."

"I shan't find him; he must find me."

"He will be an idiot if he doesn't. Pardon me if I don't dance any more to-night. I have had
a long tramp over mountain paths, followed by a long, rough ride in a farmer's wagon, and now
have a very important act to perform before I sleep. As a proof of my fraternal--I mean friendly--confidence,
I will tell you what it is, if you wish."

"I don't propose to fail in any friendly obligations, Graydon," she replied, laughing, as they
strolled out into the summer night, followed by Miss Wildmere's half-desperate eyes.

As they walked down a path, Graydon said, "Take my arm; the pavement is a little rough. Dear
Madge, you look divine to night. Every time I see you my wonder increases at what you accomplished
out on the Pacific coast. That great, boundless, sparkling ocean has given you something of
its own nature."

"Graydon, you must be more sensible. When a fellow takes your arm you don't squeeze it against
your side and say, 'Dear Tom,' 'Sweet Dick,' or 'Divine Harry,' no matter how good friends
they may be. Friends don't indulge in sentimental, far-fetched compliments."

"I certainly never did with any friends of mine. On this very walk you told me that you were
not my sister, and added, 'There is no use in trying to ignore nature.' See how true this last
assertion is proving, now that I am again under your influence, and so enjoy your society that
I cannot ignore nature. During all those years when you were growing from childhood to womanhood
I treated you as a sister, thought of you as such. It was nature, or rather the accord of two
natures, that formed and cemented the tie, and not an accident of birth. Even when you were
an invalid, and I was stupid enough to call you 'lackadaisical,' your presence always gave
me pleasure. Often when I had been out all the evening I would say, with vexation, 'I wish
I had stayed at home with the little ghost.' How you used to order me about and tyrannize over
me from your sofa when you were half child and half woman! I can say honestly, Madge, it was
never a bore to me, for you had an odd, piquant way of saying and doing things that always
amused me; your very weakness was an appeal to my strength, and a claim upon it. You always
appeared to have a sister's affection for me, and your words and manner proved that I brought
some degree of brightness into your shadowed life. In learning to love you as a sister in all
those years, wherein did I ignore nature? During my absence my feelings did not change in the
least, as I proved by my attempts at correspondence, by my greeting when we met. Then you perplexed
and worried me more than you would believe, and I imagined all sorts of ridiculous things about
you; but on that drive, after your vigil with that poor, dying girl, I felt that I understood
you fully at last. Indeed, ever since your rescue of the little Wilder child from drowning
my old feelings have been coming back with tenfold force. I can't help thinking of you, of
being proud of you. I give you my confidence to-night just as naturally and unhesitatingly
as if we had been rocked in the same cradle. I am not wearying you with this long explanation
and preamble?"

"No, Graydon," she replied, in a low tone.

"I am very glad. I don't think well of myself to-night at all, and I have a very humiliating
confession to make--one that I could make only to such a sister as you are, or rather would
have been, were there a natural tie between us. I would not tell any Tom, Dick, and Harry friends
in the world what I shall now make known to you. If I didn't trust you so, I wouldn't speak
of it, for what I shall say involves Henry as well as myself. Madge, I've been duped, I've
been made both a fool and a tool, and the consequences might have been grave indeed. Henry,
who has so much quiet sagacity, has in some way obtained information that proved of immense
importance to him, and absolutely vital to me. I shudder when I think of what might have happened,
and I am overwhelmed with gratitude when I think of my escape. I told you that Miss Wildmere
was humoring that fellow Arnault to save her father, and consequently her mother and the child.
This impression, which was given me so skilfully, and at last confirmed by plain words, was
utterly false. Henry has been in financial danger; Wildmere knew it, and he also knew that
Arnault had lent Henry money, which to-day was called in with the hope of breaking him down.
They would have succeeded, too, had he not had resources of which they knew nothing. You, of
course, can't realize how essential a little ready money sometimes is in a period of financial
depression; but Henry left a note which gave me an awful shock, while, at the same time, it
made clear Miss Wildmere's scheme. She had simply put me off, that she might hear from Wall
Street. If Henry had failed she would have decided for Arnault, and I believe my attentions
led to his tricky transaction--that he loaned the money and called it in when he believed that
Henry could not meet his demand. I must be put out of his way, for he reasoned justly that
the girl would drop me if impoverished. Thus indirectly I might have caused Henry's failure--a
blow from which I should never have recovered. Henry is safe now, he assures me; and, oh, Madge,
thank God, I have found her out before it was too late! I had fully resolved while oft trouting
that I would break with her finally if I found Arnault at her side again. Now he may marry
her, for all I care, and I wish him no worse punishment. I shall go to my room now and write
to her that everything is over between us. The fact is, Madge, you spoiled Miss Wildmere for
me on that morning drive the other day. After leaving your society and going into hers I felt
the difference keenly, and while I should then have fulfilled the obligations which I had so
stupidly incurred, I had little heart in the affair. Her acting was consummate, but a true
woman's nature had been revealed to me, and the glamour was gone from the false one. Now you
see what absolute confidence I repose in you, and how heavily this strange story bears against
myself. Could I have given it to any one for whom I had not a brother's love, and in whom I
did not hope to find a sister's gentle charity? I show you how unspent is the force of all
those years when we had scarcely a thought which we could not tell each other. I have little
claim, though, to be a protecting brother, when I have been making such an egregious fool of
myself. You have grown wiser and stronger than I. You won't think very harshly of me, will
you, Madge?"

"No, Graydon."

"And you won't condemn my fraternal affection as contrary to nature?"

She was sorely at a loss. She had listened with quickened breath, a fluttering pulse, and in
a growing tumult of hope and fear, to this undisguised revelation of his attitude toward her.
She almost thought that she detected between the lines, as it were, the beginning of a different
regard. He believed that he had been frankness itself, and his words proved that he looked
upon his fraternal affection and confidence as the natural, the almost inevitable, sequence
of the past. She could not meet him on the fraternal ground that he was taking again, nor did
she wish him to occupy it in his own mind. To maintain the attitude which she had adopted would
require as much delicacy as firmness of action, or he would begin to query why she could not
go back to their old relations as readily as he could. She had listened to the twice-told tale
of the events of the past few days with almost breathless interest, because his words revealed
the workings of his own mind, and she had not the least intention of permitting him to settle
down into the tranquil affection of a brother.

While she hesitated, he asked, gently, "Don't you feel a little of your old sisterly love for me?"

"No, Graydon, I do not," she replied, boldly. "I suppose you will think me awfully matter-of-fact.
I love Mary as my sister, I have the strongest esteem and affection for Henry as my brother-in-law,
and I like you for just what you are to me, neither more nor less. The truth is, Graydon, when
I woke up from my old limp, shadowy life I had to look at everything just as it was, and I
have formed the habit of so doing. I think it is the best way. You did not see Miss Wildmere
as she was, but as you imagined her to be, and you blame yourself too severely because you
acted as you naturally would toward a girl for whom you had so high a regard. When we stick
to the actual, we escape mistakes and embarrassment. Every one knows that we are not brother
and sister; every one would admit our right to be very good friends. I have listened to you
with the deep and honest sympathy that is perfectly natural to our relations. I think the better
of you for what you have told me, but I'm too dreadfully matter-of-fact," she concluded beginning
to laugh, "to do anything more."

He sighed deeply.

"Now, there is no occasion for that sigh, Graydon. Recall that morning drive to which you have
alluded. What franker, truer friendship could you ask than I gave evidence of then? Come now,
be sensible. You live too much in the present moment, and yield to your impulses. Miss Wildmere
was a delusion and a snare, but there are plenty of true women in the world. Some day you will
meet the right one. She won't object to your friends, but she probably would to sisters who
are not sisters."

Graydon laughed a little bitterly as he said, "So you imagine that after my recent experience
I shall soon be making love to another girl?"

"Why not? Because Miss Wildmere is a fraud do you intend to spite yourself by letting some
fair, true girl pass by unheeded? That might be to permit the fraud to injure you almost as
much as if she had married you."

He burst out laughing, as he exclaimed, "Well, your head is level."

"Certainly it is. My head is all right, even though I have not much heart, as you believe.
I told you I could be a good fellow, and I don't propose to indulge you in sentiment about
what is past and gone--natural and true as it was at the time--or in cynicism for the future.
I shall dance at your wedding, and you won't be gray, either. Come; the music has ceased, and
it must be almost Sunday morning."

"Very well. On the day when you rightly boxed my ears, and I asked you to make your own terms
of peace, I resolved to submit to everything and anything."

"You don't 'stay put,' is the trouble. Did I look and act so very cross that morning?"

"You looked magnificent, and you spoke with such just eloquent indignation that you made my
blood tingle. No, my brave, true friend--I may say that, mayn't I?--it was not a little thing
for you to go away alone to fight so heroic a battle and achieve such a victory; and, Madge,
I honor you with the best homage of my heart. You have taught me how to meet trouble when it
comes."

As they went up the steps, Arnault, with a pale, stern face, and looking neither to the right
nor to the left, passed them and strode away.

CHAPTER XXXIII

THE END OF DIPLOMACY

Mr. Arnault's manner as he passed struck both Graydon and Madge as indicating strong feeling
and stern purpose. In order to account for his action, it is necessary to go back in our history
for a short period. While Madge was receiving such rich compensation for having become simply
what she was, Miss Wildmere had been gathering the rewards of diplomacy. As we have seen, she
had reached the final conclusion that if Mr. Muir did not fail that day she would accept Graydon
at once; and, during its earlier hours, she had been complacency itself, feeling that everything
was now in her own hands. Mr. Muir's appearance and manner the previous evening had nearly
convinced her that he was in no financial difficulties whatever--that her father and Mr. Arnault
were either mistaken or else were deceiving her. "If the latter is the case," she had thought,
"they have so bungled as to enable me to test the truth of their words within twenty-four hours.

"I am virtually certain," she said, with an exultant smile, "that I shall be engaged to Graydon
Muir before I sleep to-night."

In the afternoon it began to trouble her that Graydon had not appeared. As the hours passed
she grew anxious, and with the shadow of night there fell a chill on her heart and hope. This
passed into alarm when at last Graydon arrived with his brother and Madge, and greeted her
with the cold recognition that has been described. She had met Mr. Arnault cordially at first,
because there were still possibilities in his favor; but when her father promptly disappeared,
with the evident purpose to avoid questions, and Mr. Muir and his family at supper gave evidence
of superb spirits instead of trouble, she saw that she had been duped, or, in any case, misled.
Her anger and worry increased momentarily, especially since Graydon, beyond a little furtive
observation, completely ignored her. She naturally ascribed his course to resentment at her
first greeting of Arnault, his continued presence at her side, and the almost deferential manner
with which he was treated by her father, who had joined his family at supper, when no queries
could be made.

"I'll prove to Graydon by my manner that I am for him," was her thought; but he either did
not or would not see her increasing coldness toward Arnault.

Her purpose and tactics were all observed and thoroughly understood by the latter, however,
but he gave few obvious signs of the fact. In his words, tones, compliments he proved that
he was making good all that he had promised; but the changing expression in his eyes grew so
ominous that Mr. Wildmere saw his suppressed anger with alarm.

Miss Wildmere felt sure that before the evening was over she could convey to Graydon her decision,
and chafed every moment over the leisurely supper that Mr. Arnault persisted in making, especially
as she saw that it was not his appetite that detained him. The Muir group had passed out, and
to leave him and her father would not only be an act of rudeness, but also would appear like
open pursuit of Graydon. When at last she reached the parlor, to decline Arnault's invitation
to dance would be scarcely less than an insult; yet, with intensifying anger and fear, she
saw that circumstances were compelling her to appear as if she had disregarded Graydon's warnings
and expectations. So far from being dismissed, Arnault was the one whom she had first greeted
and to whom she was now giving the evening.

While she was dancing with Arnault, Graydon, with Madge, appeared upon the floor. She was almost
reckless in her efforts to secure his attention. In this endeavor she did not fail, but she
failed signally in winning any recognition, and the ill-concealed importunity of her eyes hastened
Graydon's departure with Madge, and gave time for the long interview described in the previous
chapter. She grew cold with dread. It was the impulse of her self-pleasing nature to want that
most which seemed the most denied, and she reasoned, "He is angry because Arnault is at my
side as usual, in spite of all he said. He is determined to bring me to a decision, and won't
approach me at Arnault's side. Yet I dare not openly shake Arnault off, and he's so attentive
that I must do it openly if at all. Graydon's manner was so very strange and cold that I feel
that I should do something to conciliate him at once; and yet how can I when Arnault is bent
upon monopolizing the whole evening? He gives me no chance to leave him unless I am guilty
of the shameful rudeness of telling him to leave me. Oh, if I could only see Graydon alone,
even for a moment!"

Arnault was indeed a curious study, and yet he was acting characteristically. He had virtually
given up hope of ever winning Stella Wildmere. He had wooed devotedly, offered wealth, and
played his final card, and in each had failed. When he left the city he still had hope that
his promise of immediate wealth and Mr. Wildmere's necessity and influence might turn the scale
in his favor; and he believed that having secured her decision she, as a woman of the world,
would grow content and happy in the future that he could provide for her. But, be his fate
what it might, both his pride and his peculiar sense of honor made it imperative that he should
be her suitor until the time stipulated for his answer should expire. Up to twelve o'clock
that night he would not give her the slightest cause for resentment or even complaint. Then
his obligation to her ceased utterly, and she knew that it would.

He had been irritated and despondent ever since Mr. Muir, through Madge's aid, had so signally
checkmated him. But Stella's greeting had reassured him, and Graydon's manner toward her gave
the impression that she had not been extending encouragement to him. This promising aspect
of affairs speedily began to pass away, however, when he saw her step to Graydon's side and
ask if he was not going to shake hands with her. He knew how proud the girl was, and by this
high standard measured the strength of the regard which impelled to this advance. He had since
noted every effort that she had made to secure Graydon's attention, and the truth became perfectly
clear. She had utterly lost faith in his and her father's predictions of financial disaster
to Henry Muir, and would accept Graydon at the earliest opportunity. He saw that his defeat
in Wall Street insured his defeat in the Catskills, and feared that Graydon had guessed his
strategy, and, therefore, would not approach the girl while he was at her side. There was no
use in his playing lover any longer--he had no desire to do so--for even he now so clearly
recognized the mercenary spirit which might have brought her to his arms, that such manhood
as he had revolted at it. If she had given him her hand it would have been secured purely through
a financial trick, and even his Wall Street soul experienced a revulsion of disgust at the
thought of a wife thus obtained. If he could have detected a little sentiment toward him, some
kindly regret that she could not reward his long-continued and unstinted devotion, he would
have parted from her more in sorrow than in anger; but now he knew that she was wild to escape
from him, that she would instantly break her promise not to accept Muir before the close of
the week, and, to his punctilious business mind, the week did not end until twelve o'clock
Saturday night.

With a sort of grim vindictiveness he had muttered, "She shall keep her promise. Neither she
nor Muir shall be happy till my time has expired."

Later in the evening, Graydon not returning, the thought occurred to Arnault, "Perhaps he too
has recognized the sharp game she has played--perhaps Henry Muir has said to him, 'She has
been putting you off to see the result of the sudden calling in of Arnault's loan,' and now
young Muir proposes to console himself with that handsome Miss Alden;" and a gleam of pleasure
at the prospect illumined his face for a moment. Meanwhile he maintained his mask before the
world so admirably that even Miss Wildmere little guessed the depth of his revolt. He was the
last one to reveal his bitter disappointment and humiliating defeat to the vigilant gossips
of the house. Those who saw his smiling face and gallantries, and heard his breezy, half-cynical
words, little guessed the storm within. He had been taught in the best school in the world
how to say and look one thing and mean another.

At last an acquaintance approached, and said, "Pardon me, Mr. Arnault, but I don't propose
to permit you to monopolize Miss Wildmere all the evening;" and then asked for the next dance.

Stella complied instantly, thinking, "Graydon may return now at any moment, and if he sees
that I am not with Arnault will come to me, as usual."

Arnault bowed politely, looked at his watch, and invited another lady to dance. Stella had
been on the floor but a few moments when not Graydon, but her father came and said to her partner,
"Excuse me, sir. I wish to speak to my daughter."

Requesting her companion to wait, she followed Mr. Wildmere through an open window, and when
on the piazza he took her hand and put it within his arm with a firmness that permitted no
resistance. Arnault noted the proceeding with a cynical smile.

"Stella," said her father, in a low, stern tone, "did you not promise Mr. Arnault his answer
this evening?"

"Answer my question first," she replied, bitterly. "Did Henry Muir fail to-day? Of course he
did not. You have been deceiving me."

"I did not deceive you--I was mistaken myself. But I warn you. Graydon Muir is not at your
side. He may not return. Arnault is waiting to give you wealth and me safety, but he may not
wait much longer. You are taking worse risks than I ever incurred in the Street, and your loss
may be greater than any I have met with."

"Bah!" she replied, in anger. "I might have been engaged to Graydon Muir this moment had I
not listened to your croakings. I'll manage for myself now;" and she broke away and joined
her partner again.

After the dance was over she said, "Suppose we walk on the piazza; I'm warm." She was cold
and trembling. Arnault took his stand in the main hall, where he and she could see the clock
should she approach him again. The last hour was rapidly passing. Miss Wildmere and her attendant
strolled leisurely the whole length of the piazza, but Graydon was not to be seen. Then she
led him through a hall whence she could glance into the reception and reading rooms. The quest
was futile, and she passed Arnault unheedingly into the parlor, saying that she was tired,
and with her companion sat down where they could be seen from the doorway and windows. But
he thought her singularly distraite in her effort to maintain conversation.

"Oh," she thought, "he will come soon--he must come soon! I must--I must see him before I retire!"

Arnault meantime maintained his position in the hall, chatting and laughing with an acquaintance. What's
his name?"

"Well, if you must know, I'm walking out with Corporal Zeally. But what are you doing to the
book?" For M. Raoul had taken out a penknife and was slicing out page after page--in some places
whole blocks of pages together.

"When I've finished, I'm going to ask you to take it back to your
mistress; and then no doubt you'll be reading it on the sly. Here,
I must sit down: suppose you let me perch myself on the top bar of
the gate. Also, it would be kind of you to put up an arm and prevent
my overbalancing." Those whom the beauty of the night had lured without were
straggling in, the man at her side was growing curious and interested, and he determined to
maintain his position as long as she would.

He was detained but little longer. The clock soon chimed midnight. Arnault gave her a brief,
cold look, turned on his heel and went out, passing Graydon and Madge, who were at that moment
ascending the steps.

"Oh, pardon me," said Miss Wildmere, fairly trembling with dread; "I had no idea it was so
late!" and she bowed her companion away instantly. At that moment she saw Graydon entering,
and she went to the parlor door; but he passed her without apparent notice, and bade Madge
a cordial good-night at the foot of the stairs. As he was turning away Miss Wildmere was at
his side.

"Mr. Muir--Graydon," she said, in an eager tone, "I wish to speak with you."

He bowed very politely, and answered, in a voice that she alone could hear, "You will receive
a note from me at your room within half an hour." Then, bowing again, he walked rapidly away.

She saw from his grave face and unsympathetic eyes that she had lost him.

Half desperate, and with the instinct of self-preservation, she passed out on the piazza to
bid Arnault good-night, as she tried to assure herself, with pallid lips, but ready then at
last to take any terms from him. Arnault was not to be seen. After a moment her father stepped
to her side and said:

"Stella, it is late. You had better retire."

"I wish to say good-night to Mr. Arnault," she faltered.

"Mr. Arnault has gone."

"Gone where?" she gasped.

"I don't know. As the clock struck twelve he came rapidly out and walked away. He passed by
me, but would not answer when I spoke to him. Come, let me take you to your room."

With a chill at heart almost like that of death she went with him, and sat down pale and speechless.

In a few moments a note was brought to Mr. Wildmere's door, and he took it to his daughter.
She could scarcely open it with her nerveless fingers, and when she read the brief words--

    "MISS WILDMERE--You must permit me to renounce all claims upon
    you now and forever. Memory and your own thoughts will reveal
    to you the obvious reasons for my action, GRAYDON MUIR,"

she found a brief respite from the results of her diplomacy in unconsciousness.

CHAPTER XXXIV

BROKEN LIGHTS AND SHADOWS

Mr. Wildmere looked almost ten years older when he came down to what he supposed would be a
solitary breakfast; but something like hope and gladness reappeared on his haggard face when
he saw Arnault at his table as usual. He scarcely knew how he would be received, but Arnault
was as affable and courteous as he would have been months previous, and no one in the breakfast-room
would have imagined that anything had occurred to disturb the relations between the two gentlemen.
He inquired politely after the ladies, expressed regret that they were indisposed, and changed
the subject in a tone and manner natural to a mere acquaintance.

Although his courtesy would appear faultless to observers, it made Wildmere shiver.

"Mr. Arnault," Mr. Wildmere said, a little nervously, as they left the breakfast-room, "may
I speak with you?"

"Certainly," replied Arnault, with cool politeness, and he followed Mr. Wildmere to a deserted
part of the piazza.

"You made a very kind and liberal offer to my daughter," the latter began.

"And received my final answer last night," was the cold, decisive reply. "It would be impossible
to imagine more definite assurance that Miss Wildmere has no regard for me than was given within
the time I stipulated. I have accepted such assurance as final. Good-morning, sir," and with
a polite bow he turned on his heel and went to his room.

Mr. Wildmere afterward learned that he took the first train to New York.

"Arnault has a clear field now," Graydon had thought, cynically, while at breakfast. "I can
scarcely wish him anything worse than success;" and then he looked complacently around the
family group to which he belonged, and felicitated himself that Wildmere traits were conspicuously
absent. His eyes dwelt oftenest on Madge. At this early meal she always made him think of a
flower with the morning dew upon it. Even her evening costumes were characterized by quiet
elegance; but during the earlier hours of the day she dressed with a simplicity that was almost
severe, and yet with such good taste, such harmony with herself, that the eye of the observer
was always rested and satisfied. Gentlemen who saw her would rarely fail to speak about her
afterward; few would ever mention her dress. Miss Wildmere affected daintiness and style; Madge
sought in the most quiet and modest way to emphasize her own individuality. As far as possible
she wished to be valued for what she actually was. The very fact that there was so much in
her life that must be hidden led to a strong distaste for all that was misleading in non-essentials.

"I am going to church with you to-day," said Graydon, "and I shall try to behave."

"Try to! You cannot sit with me unless you promise to behave."

"That is the way to talk to men," said Mrs. Muir, who was completely under her husband's thumb.
"They like you all the better for showing some spirit."

"I am not trying to make Graydon like me better, but only to insure that he spends Sunday as
should a good American."

"There is no longer any 'better' about my liking for Madge. It's all best. I admit, however,
that she has so much spirit that she inspires unaffected awe."

"A roundabout way of calling me awful."

"Since you won't ride or drive with me to-day, are you too 'awfully good,' as Harry says, to
take a walk after dinner?"

"It depends on how you behave in church."

They spent the afternoon in a very different manner, however, for soon after breakfast Dr.
Sommers told them that Tilly Wendall was at rest, and that the funeral would be that afternoon.

With Dr. Sommers's tidings Graydon saw that a shadow had fallen on Madge's face, and his manner
at once became gravely and gently considerate. There were allusions to the dead girl in the
service at the chapel, where she had been an attendant, and Graydon saw half-shed tears in
Madge's eyes more than once.

She drove out with him in the lovely summer afternoon to the gray old farmhouse. The thoughts
of each were busy--they had not much to say to each other--and Madge was grateful, for his
quiet consideration for her mood. It was another proof that the man she loved had not a shallow,
coarse-fibred nature. With all his strength he could be a gentle, sympathetic presence--thinking
of her first, thoughtfully respecting her unspoken wishes, and not a garrulous egotist.

He in turn wondered at his own deep content and at the strange and unexpected turn that his
affairs had taken. He not only dwelt on what had happened, but on what might have happened--what
he had hoped for and sought to attain. He remembered with shame that he had even wished that
Madge had not been at the resort, so that he might be less embarrassed in his suit to Miss
Wildmere. From his first waking moment in the morning he had been conscious of an immeasurable
sense of relief at his escape. He felt now that he had never deeply loved Miss Wildmere--that
she had never touched the best feelings of his heart, because not capable of doing so. But
he had admired her. He had been a devotee of society, and she had been to him the beautiful
culmination of that phase of life. He saw he had endowed her with the womanly qualities which
would make her the light of a home as well as of the ballroom, but he had also seen that the
woman which his fancy had created did not exist. There is a love which is the result of admiration
and illusion, and this will often cling to its imperfect object to the end. Such was not the
case with Graydon, however. His first motive had been little more than an ambition to seek
the most brilliant of social gems with which to crown a successful life; but he was too much
of a man to marry a belle as such and be content. He must love her as a woman also, and he
had loved what he imagined Stella Wildmere to be. Now he felt, however, like a lapidary who,
while gloating over a precious stone, is suddenly shown that it is worthless paste. He may
have valued it highly an hour before; now he throws it away in angry disgust. But this simile
only in part explains Graydon's feelings. He not only recognized Miss Wildmere's mercenary
character and selfish spirit, but also the power she would have had to thwart his life and
alienate him from his brother and Madge. While she was not the pearl for which he might give
all, she could easily have become the active poison of his life.

"Oh," he thought, "how blessed is this content with sweet sister Madge--sister in spite of
all she says--compared with brief, feverish pleasure in an engagement with such a sham of a
woman, or the mad chaos of financial disaster which my suit might have brought about!" and
he unconsciously gave a profound sigh of satisfaction.

"Oh, Graydon, what a sigh!" Madge exclaimed. "Is your regret so great? You were indeed thinking
very deeply."

"So were you, Madge--so you have been during the last half hour. My sigh was one of boundless
relief and gratitude. If you will permit me, I will tell you the thoughts that occasioned it
as a proof of my friendly confidence. May I tell you?"

"Yes, if you think it right," she said, with slightly heightened color.

"It seems to me both right and natural that I should tell you;" and he put the thoughts which
preceded his sigh into words.

"Yes," she replied, gravely; "I think you have escaped much that you would regret. Please don't
talk about it any more."

"What were you thinking about, Madge?" he asked, looking into her flushed and lovely face.

"I have thought a great deal about Tilly and what passed between us. That is the house there,
and it will always remain in my mind as a distinct memory."

Farm wagons and vehicles of all descriptions were gathering at the dwelling. They were driven
by men with faces as rugged and weather-beaten as the mountains around them. By their sides
were plain-featured matrons, whose rustic beauty had early faded under the stress of life's
toil, and apple-cheeked boys and girls, with faces composed into the most unnatural and portentous
gravity. There was a sprinkling of young men, with visages so burned by the sun that they might
pass for civilized Indians. They were accompanied by young women who, in their remote rural
homes, had obtained hints from the world of fashion, and after the manner of American girls
had arrayed themselves with a neatness and taste that was surprising; and the fresh pink and
white of their complexions made a pleasing contrast with their swains. Although the occasion
was one of solemnity, it was not without its pleasurable excitement. They all knew about poor
Tilly, and to-day was the culmination of the little drama of her illness, the details of which
had been discussed for weeks among the neighbors--not in callous curiosity, but with that strange
blending of gossip and sympathy which is found in rural districts. The conclusion of all such
talk had been a sigh and the words, "She is prepared to go."

The people as yet were gathered without the door and in groups under the trees. Tilly's remains
were still in her own little room, Mrs. Wendall taking her farewell look with hollow, tearless
eyes. A few favored ones, chiefly the watchers who had aided the stricken mother, were admitted
to this retreat of sorrow.

When Dr. Sommers saw Madge and Graydon he came to them and said, "Mrs. Wendall requested that
when you came you and whoever accompanied you should be brought to her. Tilly, before she died,
expressed the wish that you should sit with her mother during the funeral. No, no, Mr. Muir,
Mrs. Wendall would have no objection to any of Miss Alden's friends. I can give you a seat
here by this window. The other rooms will be very crowded with those who are strangers to you."

Graydon found himself by the same window at which Madge had sat in her long vigil. The bed
had been removed, and in its place was a plain yet tasteful casket. Mr. Wendall, with his head
bowed down, sat at its foot, wiping away tears from time to time with a bandana handkerchief.
Two or three stanch friends and helpers sat also in the room, for it would appear that the
Wendalls had no relatives in the vicinity.

As Madge sat down by Mrs. Wendall, so intent was the mother's gaze upon her dead child that
she did not at first notice the young girl's presence. Madge took a thin, toil-worn hand caressingly
in both her own, and then the tearless eyes were turned upon her, and the light of recognition
came slowly into them, as if she were recalling her thoughts from an immense distance.

"I'm glad you've come," she said, in a loud, strange whisper. "She wanted you to be with me.
She said you had trouble, and would know how to sustain me. She left a message for you. She
said, 'Tell dear Madge that the dying sometimes have clear vision--tell her I've prayed for
her ever since, and she'll be happy yet, even in this world. Tell her that I only saw her a
little while, but she belongs to those I shall wait for to welcome.' You'll stay by me till
it's all over, won't you?"

Madge was deeply agitated, but she managed to say distinctly, "Tilly also said something to
me, and I want you to think of her words through all that is to come. She said, 'Think where
I have gone, and don't grieve a moment.'"

"Yes, I'll come to that by and by; but now I can think of only one thing--they are going to
take away my baby;" and she laid her head on the still bosom with a yearning in her face which
only God, who created the mother's heart, could understand.

What followed need not be dwelt upon. The mother and father took their last farewell, the casket
was carried to the outer room, the simple service was soon over, the tearful tributes paid,
and then the slow procession took its way to a little graveyard on a hillside among the mountains.

"I can't go and see Tilly buried," said Mrs. Wendall, in the same unnatural whisper. "I will
go to her grave some day, but not yet. I am trying to keep up, but I don't feel that I could
stand on my feet a minute now."

"I'll stay with you till they come back," Madge answered, tenderly; and at last she was left
alone in the house, holding the tearless mother's hand. She soon bowed her young head upon
it, bedewing it with her tears. The poor woman's deep absorption began to pass away. The warm
tears upon her hand, the head upon her lap, began to waken the instincts of womanhood to help
and console another. She stroked the dark hair and murmured, "Poor child, poor child! Tilly
was right. Trouble makes us near of kin."

"You loved Tilly, Mrs. Wendall," Madge sobbed. "Think of where she's gone. No more tears; no
more pain; no more death."

Her touch of sympathy broke the stony paralysis; her hot tears melted those which seemed to
have congealed in the breaking heart, and the mother took Madge in her arms and cried till
her strength was gone.

When Mr. Wendall returned with some of the neighbors, Madge met him at the door and held up
a warning finger. The overwrought woman had been soothed into the blessed oblivion of restoring
sleep, the first she had for many hours. A motherly-looking woman whispered her intention of
remaining with Mrs. Wendall all night. Mr. Wendall took Madge's hand in both his own, and looked
at her with eyes dim with tears. Twice he essayed to speak, then turned away, faltering, "When
I meet you where Tilly is, perhaps I can tell you."

She went down the little path bordered by flowers which the dead girl had loved and tended,
and gathered a few of them. Then Graydon drove her away, his only greeting being a warm pressure
of her hand.

At last Madge breathed softly, "Think where I have gone. Where is heaven? What is it?"

His eyes were moist as he turned toward her. "I don't know, Madge," he said. "I know one thing,
however, I shall never, as you asked, say a word against your faith. I've seen its fruits to-day."

CHAPTER XXXV

A NEW EXPERIMENT

Stella Wildmere would not leave the seclusion of her room. As the hours passed the more overwhelming
grew her disappointment and humiliation, and her chief impulse now was to get away from a place
that had grown hateful to her. The colony is neutral ground, the only ground where, as in church, the upper
rank and the townsfolk of the place can meet. Here, fired by a word, a look, or gesture, are started
those feuds between house and house, between a woman of rank and a citizen's wife, which endure
till death, and widen the impassable gulf which parts the two classes
of society.

With the exception of the Clermont-Mont-Saint-Jean, the Beauffremont, the de Scey, and the Gramont families,
with a few others who come only to stay on their estates in the Comte,
the aristocracy of Besancon dates no further back than a couple of
centuries, the time of the conquest by Louis XIV.

This little world is essentially of the parlement, and arrogant,
stiff, solemn, uncompromising, haughty beyond all comparison, even
with the Court of Vienna, for in this the nobility of Besancon would
put the Viennese drawing-rooms to shame.

As to Victor Hugo, Nodier, Fourier, the glories of the town, they
are never mentioned, no one thinks about them.

The marriages in these families are arranged in the cradle, so rigidly are the greatest things
settled as well as the smallest.

No stranger, no intruder, ever finds his way into one of these houses, and to obtain an introduction
for the colonels or officers of title belonging to the first families
in France when quartered there, requires efforts of diplomacy which
Prince Talleyrand would gladly have mastered to use at a congress.

In 1834 Amedee was the only man in Besancon who wore trouser-straps;
this will account for the young man's being regarded as a lion.

And a little anecdote will enable you to understand the city of Besancon.

Some time before the opening of this story, the need arose at the
prefecture for bringing an editor from Paris for the official newspaper,
to enable it to hold its own against the little Gazette, dropped at
Besancon by the great Gazette, and the Patriot, which frisked in the
hands of the Republicans.

Paris sent them a young man, knowing nothing about la Franche Comte,
who began by writing them a leading article of the school of the Charivari.

The chief of the moderate party, a member of the municipal council, sent for the journalist
and said to him, "You must understand, monsieur, that we are serious,
more than serious--tiresome; we resent being amused, and are furious
at having been made to laugh.

Be as hard of digestion as the toughest disquisitions in the Revue
des Deux Mondes, and you will hardly reach the level of Besancon."

The editor took the hint, and thenceforth spoke the most incomprehensible
philosophical lingo.

His success was complete.

If young Monsieur de Soulas did not fall in the esteem of Besancon society, it was out of pure vanity
on its part; the aristocracy were happy to affect a modern air, and to be able to show any Parisians
of rank who visited the Comte a young man who bore some likeness to them.

All this hidden labor, all this dust thrown in people's eyes, this display of folly and latent
prudence, had an object, or the lion of Besancon would have been
no son of the soil.

Amedee wanted to achieve a good marriage by proving some day that his farms were not mortgaged,
and that he had some savings. He wanted to be the talk of the town, to be the finest and best-dressed
man there, in order to win first the attention, and then the hand, of Mademoiselle Rosalie
de Watteville.

In 1830, at the time when young Monsieur de Soulas was setting up in business as a dandy, Rosalie
was but fourteen. Hence, in 1834, Mademoiselle de Watteville had reached the age when young persons
are easily struck by the peculiarities which attracted the attention of the town to Amedee. There
are so many lions who become lions out of self-interest and speculation. The Wattevilles, who
for twelve years had been drawing an income of fifty thousand francs a year, did not spend
more than four-and-twenty thousand francs a year, while receiving
all the upper circle of Besancon every Monday and Friday.

On Monday they gave a dinner, on Friday an evening party. Thus, in twelve years, what a sum
must have accumulated from twenty-six thousand francs a year, saved and invested with the
judgment that distinguishes those old families!

It was very generally supposed that Madame de Watteville, thinking she had land enough, had placed
her savings in the three per cents, in 1830.

Rosalie's dowry would therefore, as the best informed opined, amount
to about twenty thousand francs a year.

So for the last five years Amedee had worked like a mole to get into
the highest favor of the severe Baroness, while laying himself out
to flatter Mademoiselle de Watteville's conceit.

Madame de Watteville was in the secret of the devices by which Amedee succeeded in keeping up
his rank in Besancon, and esteemed him highly for it. Soulas had placed himself under her wing
when she was thirty, and at that time had dared to admire her and make her his idol; he had
got so far as to be allowed--he alone in the world--to pour out to her all the unseemly gossip which
almost all very precise women love to hear, being authorized by their superior virtue to look
into the gulf without falling, and into the devil's snares without being caught. Do you understand
why the lion did not allow himself the very smallest intrigue? He lived a public life, in the
street so to speak, on purpose to play the part of a lover sacrificed to duty by the Baroness, and
to feast her mind with the sins she had forbidden to her senses. A man who is so privileged
as to be allowed to pour light stories into the ear of a bigot is in her eyes a charming man.
If this exemplary youth had better known the human heart, he might
without risk have allowed himself some flirtations among the grisettes
of Besancon who looked up to him as a king; his affairs might perhaps
have been all the more hopeful with the strict and prudish Baroness.

To Rosalie our Cato affected prodigality; he professed a life of
elegance, showing her in perspective the splendid part played by a
woman of fashion in Paris, whither he meant to go as Depute.

All these manoeuvres were crowned with complete success. In 1834 the mothers of the forty noble families
composing the high society of Besancon quoted Monsieur Amedee de Soulas as the most charming
young man in the town; no one would have dared to dispute his place
as cock of the walk at the Hotel de Rupt, and all Besancon regarded
him as Rosalie de Watteville's future husband.

There had even been some exchange of ideas on the subject between
the Baroness and Amedee, to which the Baron's apparent nonentity gave
some certainty.

Mademoiselle de Watteville, to whom her enormous prospective fortune at that time lent considerable
importance, had been brought up exclusively within the precincts of the Hotel de Rupt--which her
mother rarely quitted, so devoted was she to her dear Archbishop--and
severely repressed by an exclusively religious education, and by her
mother's despotism, which held her rigidly to principles.

Rosalie knew absolutely nothing.

Is it knowledge to have learned geography from Guthrie, sacred history,
ancient history, the history of France, and the four rules all passed
through the sieve of an old Jesuit?

Dancing and music were forbidden, as being more likely to corrupt life than to grace it. The
Baroness taught her daughter every conceivable stitch in tapestry and women's work--plain sewing,
embroidery, netting. At seventeen Rosalie had never read anything but the Lettres edifiantes
and some works on heraldry. No newspaper had ever defiled her sight. She attended mass at the
Cathedral every morning, taken there by her mother, came back to breakfast, did needlework
after a little walk in the garden, and received visitors, sitting with the baroness until dinner-time.
Then, after dinner, excepting on Mondays and Fridays, she accompanied Madame de Watteville to
other houses to spend the evening, without being allowed to talk
more than the maternal rule permitted.

At eighteen Mademoiselle de Watteville was a slight, thin girl with a flat figure, fair, colorless,
and insignificant to the last degree. Her eyes, of a very light blue, borrowed beauty from their
lashes, which, when downcast, threw a shadow on her cheeks. A few freckles marred the whiteness of
her forehead, which was shapely enough. Her face was exactly like those of Albert Durer's saints,
or those of the painters before Perugino; the same plump, though slender modeling, the same
delicacy saddened by ecstasy, the same severe guilelessness.

Everything about her, even to her attitude, was suggestive of those virgins, whose beauty is
only revealed in its mystical radiance to the eyes of the studious connoisseur. She had fine
hands though red, and a pretty foot, the foot of an aristocrat.

She habitually wore simple checked cotton dresses; but on Sundays
and in the evening her mother allowed her silk.

The cut of her frocks, made at Besancon, almost made her ugly, while her mother tried to borrow
grace, beauty, and elegance from Paris fashions; for through Monsieur de Soulas she procured
the smallest trifles of her dress from thence. Rosalie had never worn a pair of silk stockings
or thin boots, but always cotton stockings and leather shoes. On high days she was dressed in
a muslin frock, her hair plainly dressed, and had bronze kid shoes.

This education, and her own modest demeanor, hid in Rosalie a spirit of iron. Physiologists and
profound observers will tell you, perhaps to your astonishment, that tempers, characteristics, wit,
or genius reappear in families at long intervals, precisely like what are known as hereditary
diseases. Thus talent, like the gout, sometimes skips over two generations. We have an illustrious
example of this phenomenon in George Sand, in whom are resuscitated
the force, the power, and the imaginative faculty of the Marechal
de Saxe, whose natural granddaughter she is.

The decisive character and romantic daring of the famous Watteville had reappeared in the soul of
his grand-niece, reinforced by the tenacity and pride of blood of
the Rupts.

But these qualities--or faults, if you will have it so--were as deeply buried in this young
girlish soul, apparently so weak and yielding, as the seething lavas within a hill before it becomes
a volcano. Madame de Watteville alone, perhaps, suspected this inheritance
from two strains.

She was so severe to her Rosalie, that she replied one day to the Archbishop, who blamed her for
being too hard on the child, "Leave me to manage her, monseigneur.
I know her!

She has more than one Beelzebub in her skin!"

The Baroness kept all the keener watch over her daughter, because she considered her honor as a
mother to be at stake. After all, she had nothing else to do. Clotilde de Rupt, at this time five-and-thirty,
and as good as widowed, with a husband who turned egg-cups in every variety of wood, who set
his mind on making wheels with six spokes out of iron-wood, and manufactured
snuff-boxes for everyone of his acquaintance, flirted in strict propriety
with Amedee de Soulas.

When this young man was in the house, she alternately dismissed and recalled her daughter,
and tried to detect symptoms of jealousy in that youthful soul, so as to have occasion to
repress them.

She imitated the police in its dealings with the republicans; but
she labored in vain.

Rosalie showed no symptoms of rebellion. Then the arid bigot accused her daughter of perfect insensibility.
Rosalie knew her mother well enough to be sure that if she had thought
young Monsieur de Soulas nice, she would have drawn down on herself
a smart reproof.

Thus, to all her mother's incitement she replied merely by such phrases
as are wrongly called Jesuitical--wrongly, because the Jesuits were
strong, and such reservations are the chevaux de frise behind which
weakness takes refuge.

Then the mother regarded the girl as a dissembler. If by mischance a spark of the true nature of
the Wattevilles and the Rupts blazed out, the mother armed herself with the respect due from
children to their parents to reduce Rosalie to passive obedience.

This covert battle was carried on in the most secret seclusion of domestic life, with closed
doors. The Vicar-General, the dear Abbe Grancey, the friend of the late Archbishop, clever as
he was in his capacity of the chief Father Confessor of the diocese, could not discover whether
the struggle had stirred up some hatred between the mother and daughter, whether the mother
were jealous in anticipation, or whether the court Amedee was paying
to the girl through her mother had not overstepped its due limits.

Being a friend of the family, neither mother nor daughter, confessed to him. Rosalie, a little
too much harried, morally, about young de Soulas, could not abide
him, to use a homely phrase, and when he spoke to her, trying to take
her heart by surprise, she received him but coldly.

This aversion, discerned only by her mother's eyes, was a constant subject of admonition.

"Rosalie, I cannot imagine why you affect such coldness towards Amedee.

Is it because he is a friend of the family, and because we like him--your father and I?"

"Well, mamma," replied the poor child one day, "if I made him welcome,
should I not be still more in the wrong?"

"What do you mean by that?" cried Madame de Watteville.

"What is the meaning of such words? Your mother is unjust, no doubt, and according to you, would
be so in any case! Never let such an answer pass your lips again to your mother--" and so forth.

This quarrel lasted three hours and three-quarters. Rosalie noted the time. Her mother, pale with
fury, sent her to her room, where Rosalie pondered on the meaning
of this scene without discovering it, so guileless was she.

Thus young Monsieur de Soulas, who was supposed by every one to be
very near the end he was aiming at, all neckcloths set, and by dint
of pots of patent blacking--an end which required so much waxing of
his moustaches, so many smart waistcoats, wore out so many horseshoes
and stays--for he wore a leather vest, the stays of the lion--Amedee,
I say, was further away than any chance comer, although he had on
his side the worthy and noble Abbe de Grancey.

* * * * *

"Madame," said Monsieur de Soulas, addressing the Baroness, while waiting till his soup was
cool enough to swallow, and affecting to give a romantic turn to his narrative, "one fine morning
the mail coach dropped at the Hotel National a gentleman from Paris,
who, after seeking apartments, made up his mind in favor of the first
floor in Mademoiselle Galard's house, Rue du Perron.

Then the stranger went straight to the Mairie, and had himself registered as a resident with all
political qualifications. Finally, he had his name entered on the list of the barristers to
the Court, showing his title in due form, and he left his card on all his new colleagues, the
Ministerial officials, the Councillors of the Court, and the members of the bench, with the name,
'ALBERT SAVARON.'"

"The name of Savaron is famous," said Mademoiselle de Watteville, who was strong in heraldic information.
"The Savarons of Savarus are one of the oldest, noblest, and richest families in Belgium."

"He is a Frenchman, and no man's son," replied Amedee de Soulas. "If he wishes to bear the arms
of the Savarons of Savarus, he must add a bar-sinister. There is no one left of the Brabant
family but a Mademoiselle de Savarus, a rich heiress, and unmarried."

"The bar-sinister is, of course, the badge of a bastard; but the bastard of a Comte de Savarus
is noble," answered Rosalie.

"Enough, that will do, mademoiselle!" said the Baroness.

"You insisted on her learning heraldry," said Monsieur de Watteville, "and she knows it very well."

"Go
on, I beg, Monsieur de Soulas."

"You may suppose that in a town where everything is classified, known, pigeon-holed, ticketed,
and numbered, as in Besancon, Albert Savaron was received without
hesitation by the lawyers of the town.

They were satisfied to say, 'Here is a man who does not know his Besancon. Who the devil can have
sent him here? What can he hope to do? Sending his card to the Judges instead of calling in person!
What a blunder!' And so, three days after, Savaron had ceased to exist. He took as his servant old
Monsieur Galard's man--Galard being dead--Jerome, who can cook a
little.

Albert Savaron was all the more completely forgotten, because no one had seen him or met him
anywhere."

"Then, does he not go to mass?" asked Madame de Chavoncourt.

"He goes on Sundays to Saint-Pierre, but to the early service at eight
in the morning.

He rises every night between one and two in the morning, works till eight, has his breakfast, and
then goes on working. He walks in his garden, going round fifty, or perhaps sixty times; then he
goes in, dines, and goes to bed between six and seven."

"How did you learn all that?" Madame de Chavoncourt asked Monsieur de Soulas.

"In the first place, madame, I live in the Rue Neuve, at the corner of the Rue du Perron; I look out
on the house where this mysterious personage lodges; then, of course,
there are communications between my tiger and Jerome."

"And you gossip with Babylas?"

"What would you have me do out riding?"

"Well--and how was it that you engaged a stranger for your defence?"
asked the Baroness, thus placing the conversation in the hands of
the Vicar-General.

"The President of the Court played this pleader a trick by appointing him to defend at the Assizes
a half-witted peasant accused of forgery.

But Monsieur Savaron procured the poor man's acquittal by proving his innocence and showing that
he had been a tool in the hands of the real culprits. Not only did his line of defence succeed,
but it led to the arrest of two of the witnesses, who were proved
guilty and condemned.

His speech struck the Court and the jury. One of these, a merchant, placed a difficult case
next day in the hands of Monsieur Savaron, and he won it. In the position in which we found ourselves,
Monsieur Berryer finding it impossible to come to Besancon, Monsieur
de Garcenault advised him to employ this Monsieur Albert Savaron,
foretelling our success.

As soon as I saw him and heard him, I felt faith in him, and I was
not wrong."

"Is he then so extraordinary?" asked Madame de Chavoncourt.

"Certainly, madame," replied the Vicar-General.

"Well, tell us about
it," said Madame de Watteville.

"The first time I saw him," said
the Abbe de Grancey, "he received me in his outer room next the ante-room--old
Galard's drawing-room--which he has had painted like old oak, and
which I found entirely lined with law-books, arranged on shelves also
painted as old oak.

When he entered the "spare room" of the farmhouse Madge, with a smile that was like a ray of
sunshine, extended her hand from the lounge on which she was reclining, and said:

"You didn't fail me, Graydon. I couldn't have kept up a moment longer. I should have fainted
before had I not heard your voice. How good God has been!"

He held her hand in both his own, his mouth twitched nervously, but his emotion was too strong
for speech.

"Don't feel so badly, Graydon," she resumed, and her voice was gentleness itself; "I am not
hurt, nor are you to blame."

"I am to blame," he said, hoarsely. "I gave you that brute, but he's dead. I shot him instantly.
Oh, Madge, if--if--I feel that I would have shot myself."

"Graydon, please be more calm," she faltered, tears coming into her eyes. "There, see, you
are making me cry. I can't bear to see you--I can't bear to see a man--so moved. Please now,
you look so pale that I am frightened. I'm not strong, but shall get better at once if I see
you yourself."

"Forgive me, Madge, but it seems as if I had suffered the pangs of death ten times over--there,
I won't speak about it till we both have recovered from the shock. Dear, brave little girl;
how can I thank you enough for keeping up till I could reach you!"

She began to laugh a little too nervously to be natural. Her heart was glad over her escape,
and in a gladder tumult at his words and manner. He was no shadow of a man, nor did ice-water
flow in his veins. His feeling had been so strong that it had almost broken her self-control.

"Some day," she exulted, "some day God will turn his fraternal affection into the wine of love."

"I'm so nervous," she said, "that I must either laugh or cry. What a plight we are in! How
shall we go forward or backward?"

"We shall not do either very soon. Mrs. Hobson is making you a cup of tea, and then you must
rest thoroughly, and sleep, if possible."

"What will you do?"

"Oh, I'll soothe my nerves with a cigar, and berate myself on the porch! When you are thoroughly
rested I'll have Mr. Hobson drive us on to the nearest station. We are in no plight whatever,
if you received no harm."

"I haven't. Promise me one thing."

"Anything--everything."

"Do no berating. I'm sorry you killed the horse; but he did act vilely, and I suppose you had
to let off your anger in some way. I was angry myself at first--he was so stupid. But when
I found I couldn't hold him at all I thought I must die--Oh, how it all comes back to me! What
thoughts I had, and how sweet life became! Oh, oh--" and she began sobbing like a child.

"Madge, please--I can't endure this, indeed I can't."

But her overwrought nerves were not easily controlled, and he knelt beside her, speaking soothingly
and pleadingly. "Dear Madge, dear sister Madge. Oh, I wish Mary was here!" and he kissed her
again and again.

"Graydon," she gasped, "stop! There--I'm better;" and she did seem to recover almost instantly.

"Law bless you, sir," said Mrs. Hobson, who had entered with the tea, "your sister'll be all
right in an hour or so."

Graydon sprang to his feet, and there was a strong dash of color in his face. As for the hitherto
pallid Madge, her visage was like a peony, and she was preternaturally quiet.

"Try to sleep, Madge," said Graydon, from the doorway, "and I won't 'worry or take on' a bit;"
and he disappeared.

There was no sleep for her, and yet she felt herself wonderfully restored. Was it the potency
of Mrs. Hobson's tea? or that which he had placed upon her lips?

CHAPTER XXXVII

"YOU ARE VERY BLIND"

As a general rule Graydon was not conscious of nerves, and had received the fact of their existence
largely on faith. But to-day they asserted themselves in a manner which excited his surprise
and some rather curious speculation. He found his heart beating in a way difficult to account
for on a physiological basis, his pulses fluttering, and his thoughts in a luminous haze, wherein
nothing was very distinct except Madge's flushing face, startled eyes, looking a protest through
their tears. It was not so much an indignant protest as it was a frightened one, he half imagined.
And why was he so confused and disturbed that, instead of sitting quietly down in the porch,
as he had intended, he was impelled to walk restlessly to a neighboring grove! For one so intensely
fraternal he felt he was continuing to "take on" in a very unnecessary style.

"Confound that woman!" he muttered. "Why did she have to come in just then, and why should
I blush like a schoolgirl because she caught me kissing one that I regard as a sister? And
why did the word sister sound so unnatural when spoken by Mrs. Hobson? 'Great Scott!' as Henry
says, I hope I'm not growing to love Madge. She would overwhelm me with ridicule, infused,
perhaps, with a spice of contempt, if I gave her the impression that I had fallen out of love
one week and in the next. Hang it! I'm all broken up from this day's experience. I had better
get on my feet mentally, and then I shall be able to find out where I stand."

The demon of restlessness soon drove him back to the house again, and he learned that there
would be a train in about two hours. They would still have time to dine at the Kaaterskill
and return before night. He therefore made arrangements to be driven to the station, also to
have the horse he had ridden and the saddles taken back to the Under-Cliff House.

There was a faint after-glow on Madge's cheeks when she joined him at the substantial repast
which Mr. and Mrs. Hobson insisted upon their partaking before departure; but in all other
respects she appeared and acted as usual. With a fineness of tact she was at home among her
plain entertainers, and put them at ease. Mrs. Hobson continued to speak of her as Graydon's
sister, and he had darted a humorous glance at the girl; but it met such grave impassiveness
of expression that he feared she was angry.

When parting from her hostess Madge spoke words which left a genial expression on the good
dame's face for hours thereafter, and at the station Graydon put in Mr. Hobson's hand more
than he could have gathered from his stony farm that day, although he had been called from
the harvest field.

During the first mile or two in the cars Madge was very quiet, and seemed almost wholly engrossed
with the scenery. At last Graydon leaned toward her and asked, "Are you vexed with me, Madge?"

"I find that I must maintain my self-control when with you, Graydon," was the grave reply.

"Forgive me, Madge. I scarcely knew what I was doing. Let your thoughts take my part a little.
Remember that within the hour I had believed I had lost you. I haven't had a chance to tell
you yet, but when you passed under the train you appeared from where I was to dash into it,
and I nearly fainted and fell off my horse. Think what a horrible shock I had. I also was nervous
and all broken up--the first time in my life that I remember being so. I couldn't cry as you
did, and when off my balance kissing you was just as natural to me as--" Madge's mouth had
been twitching, and now, in spite of herself, her laugh broke forth.

"Please forgive me, Madge;" and he held out his hand.

"On condition that you will never do so again, or speak of it again."

"Never?" he repeated, ruefully.

"Never!" she said, with severe emphasis.

"I won't make any such promise," he replied, stubbornly.

"Oh, very well!" and she turned to the window.

"Confound it!" he thought; "I'm not going to tie myself up by any such pledge. I'm not sure
of myself, or sure of anything, except that I'm a free man, and that Madge won't be my sister.
I shall remain free. She herself once said in effect that I could take a straight course when
once I got my bearings, and I shall permit no more promises or trammels till I do get them."

They passed speedily on to the end of their journey, and were the perfection of quiet, well-bred
travellers, he disguising a slightly vexatious constraint and sense of unduly severe punishment,
and she secretly exulting over the fact that he would not make the promise.

When leaving the Kaaterskill station her eyes first rested on the adjacent lake, and its wide
extent suggested the opportunity to pull an oar to some purpose. As the stage surmounted the
last approach to the hotel, and the valley of the Hudson, with the river winding through it
like a silver band, broke upon her vision, the apparent cloud passed from her brow, and her
pleasure was unaffected. A few inquiries and the study of a map of the vicinity made it evident
that the region abounded in superb walks and drives, while from the front piazza there was
a panorama that would never lose its changing interest and beauty. A suite of rooms was selected,
with the understanding that they should be occupied on Wednesday.

Madge soon found herself the object of no little curiosity and interest. The story of her mad
ride had reached the house, and she was recognized by some who had been on the train; but Graydon
met inquiries in such a way that they were not pushed very far. To a reporter he said, "Is
this affair ours or the public's? We have not trespassed on any one's rights."

He reassured Madge by saying, "Don't worry about it; such things are only the talk of a day."

They returned during the afternoon. Graydon's manner was courtesy itself, and but little more;
but he was becoming a vigilant student of his companion, and she soon was dimly aware of the fact.

"I will understand her," he had resolved. "I intend to get my bearings, and then shape my course,
for I cannot help feeling that the destiny of the little girl who used to sit on my lap, with
her head on my shoulder, is in some way interwoven with mine. Even when I believed myself in
love with another woman she had more power over me than Stella--more power to kindle thought
and awaken my deeper nature. I begin to think that all her talk about being a friend, good
fellow, etc., is greater nonsense than my fraternal proposals. No friend, fellow, or sister
could make my heart beat as it did to-day. No human being in mortal peril could have awakened
such desperate, reckless despair as I felt at one time, and" (with a smile to himself) "I never
knew what a kiss was before. I'm not the fool to ignore all these symptoms. I'll fathom the
mystery of this sweet, peerless girl, if it takes all summer and all my life."

But the fair enigma at his side grew more inscrutable. Neither by tone nor glance did she indicate
that he was more to her than she had said.

"Do you wish to recognize the scenes we passed over this morning?" he asked, gently, as they
approached them.

"No, not yet. I don't wish to think about it any more than I can help."

"Your wishes are mine."

"Occasionally, perhaps."

"You shall see."

"I usually do," was her laughing answer.

But she began to appear very weary, and when they reached the Under-Cliff House she went to
her room, and did not reappear again that day.

Graydon made even Dr. Sommers's ruddy cheek grow pale by his brief narrative, adding, "Perhaps
her nerves have received a severer shock than she yet understands. I wish you would tell Mrs.
Muir the story, making as light of it as you can, and with her aid you can insure that Miss
Alden obtains the rest and tonics she needs. You can also meet and quiet the rumors that may
be flying about, and you know that Miss Alden has a strong aversion to being talked to or of
about personal affairs."

In youth, health, and sleep Madge found the best restoratives, and the morning saw her little
the worse for the experiences of the previous day. The hours passed quickly in preparations
for departure and in a call on Mr. and Mrs. Wendall, who gave evidence that they were becoming
more resigned.

"I am at work again," said the farmer, "and so is Nancy. There's nothing else for us to do
but plod toward home, where Tilly is."

Regret was more general and sincere than is usual when the transient associations of a resort
are broken. Dr. Sommers's visage could not lengthen literally, and yet it approached as nearly
to a funereal aspect as was possible. He brightened up, however, when Madge slipped something
into his hand "for the chapel."

They were soon comfortably established in their new quarters, and in the late afternoon Madge
was so rested that she took a short walk with Graydon to Sunset Rock, and saw the shadows deepen
in the vast, beautiful Kaaterskill Clove. Then they returned by the ledge path. At last they
entered the wonderful Palenvilie Road, a triumph of practical engineering, and built by a plain
mountaineer, who, from the base of the mountain to the summit, made his surveys and sloped
his grades by the aid of his eye only. They had been comparatively silent, and Graydon finally
remarked: "It gives me unalloyed pleasure, Madge, to look upon such scenes with you. There
is no need of my pointing out anything. I feel that you see more than I do, and I understand
better what I do see from the changing expression of your eyes. Don't you think such unspoken
appreciation of the same thing is the basis of true companionship?"

"Oh, Graydon, what an original thought!"

He bit his lip, and remarked that the evening was growing cool.

At supper and during the evening his vigilance was not rewarded in the slightest degree. Madge
appeared in good spirits, and talked charmingly, even brilliantly at times, but she was exceedingly
impersonal, and it was now his policy to follow her slightest lead in everything. He would
prove that her wish was his, as far as he knew it.

"Some day," he thought, "I shall find a clew to her mystery."

The next morning Graydon went to the city, and would not return till Friday evening of the
following week, for it was now his purpose to resume business. In the evening he and his brother
discussed their affairs, which were beginning to improve all along the line. Then their talk
converged more upon topics connected with this story, and among them was Mr. Wildmere's suspension.

"His failure don't amount to very much," Henry remarked; "he has always done business in a
sort of hand-to-mouth way."

"I am surprised that Arnault permitted him to go down," Graydon said; "it couldn't have taken
very much to keep him up."

"It is said that Arnault will have nothing to do with him, and that this fact has hastened
his downfall."

"Well, so she played it too sharp on him, also. I was in hopes that she would marry and punish
him. I don't wonder at his course, though; for if he has a spark of spirit he would not forgive
her treatment after she learned that you had not failed. Oh, how blind I was!"

"Yes, Graydon, you are very blind," said Mr. Muir, inadvertently.

"'Are?' Why do you use the present tense?"

"Did I?" replied Mr. Muir, a little confusedly. "Well, you see, Madge and I understood Miss
Wildmere from the first."

"Oh, hang Miss Wildmere! Do you think Madge--"

"Now stop right there, Graydon. I think Madge is the best and most sensible girl I ever knew,
and that's all you will ever get out of me."

"Pardon me, Henry. I spoke from impulse, and not a worthy one, either. I tell you point blank,
however, that Madge Alden hasn't her equal in the world. I would love her in a moment if I
dared. Would to Heaven I could have spent some time with her immediately after my return! In
that case there would have been no Wildmere folly. I declare, Henry, when I thought she must
be killed the other day I felt that the end of my own life had come. I can't tell you what
that girl is to me; but with her knowledge of the past how can I approach her in decency?"

"Well," said Mr. Muir, shrugging his shoulders and rising to retire, "you are out of the worst
part of your scrape, and Madge is alive and well. This is not a little to be thankful for.
I shall confine my advice to business matters. Still, were I in your shoes, I know what I should
do. 'Faint heart,' you know. Good-night."

Graydon did not move, or scarcely answer, but, with every faculty of mind concentrated, he
thought, "Henry's explanation of his use of the present tense does not explain, and there is
more meaning in what he left unsaid in our recent interview than in what he said. Can it be
possible? Let me take this heavenly theory and, as we were taught at college, see how much
there is to support it. Was there any change in her manner toward me before we parted years
since? Why, she was taken ill that night when she first met Miss Wildmere, and I stayed away
from her so long--idiot!"

From that hour he went forward, scanning everything that had occurred between them, until he
saw again her flushing face and startled eyes when he kissed her, and his belief grew strong
that it was his immense good-fortune to fulfil the prediction that Madge should be happy.

The thought kept him sleepless most of that night, and made the time which must intervene before
he could see her again seem long indeed. He did his utmost to get the details of his department
well in hand during business hours; but after they were over his mind returned at once to Madge,
and never did a scientist hunt for facts and hints in support of a pet theory so eagerly as
did Graydon scan the past for confirmation of his hope, that long years of companionship had
given him a place in Madge's heart which no one else possessed, and that his blindness or indifference
to the truth was the sorrow of her life. This view explained why she would not regard herself
as his sister, and could not permit the intimacy natural to the relation.

When he examined the attitude of his own heart toward her he was not surprised that his affection
was passing swiftly into a love deeper and far more absorbing than Stella Wildmere had ever
inspired.

"The old law of cause and effect," he said, smiling to himself, "and I can imagine no effect
in me adequate to the cause. Even when she scarcely cast a shadow she was more companionable
than Stella, but it never occurred to me to think of her in any other light than that of little
sister Madge. Almost as soon as the thought occurred to me, and I had a right to love her,
love became as natural as it was inevitable. Even in the height of my infatuation for Stella,
Madge was winning me from her unconsciously to myself."

Such thoughts and convictions imparted a gentle and almost caressing tone to his words when
Madge welcomed and accompanied him to his late supper on his return to the mountains.

This significant accent was more marked than ever when she promenaded with him for a brief
time on the piazza. Nor did a little brusqueness on her part banish the tone and manner which
were slight indeed, but unmistakable to her quick intuition.

"Could Henry have given him a hint?" she queried; and her brow contracted and her eyes flashed
indignantly at the thought.

As a result of the suspicion, she left him speedily, and in the morning was glad to hope, from
his more natural bearing, that she had been over-sensitive.

The sagacious Graydon, however, was maturing a plan which he hoped would bring her the happiness
which it would be his happiness to confer.

"She is so proud and spirited," he thought, "that only when surprised and off her guard will
she reveal to me a glimpse of the truth. If I consulted my own pride I wouldn't speak for a
long time to come--not till she had ceased to associate me with Stella Wildmere; but if she
is loving me as I believe she would love a man, she shall not doubt an hour longer than I can
help, that I and my life's devotion are hers. Sweet Madge, you shall make your own terms again!"

CHAPTER XXXVIII

"CERTAINLY I REFUSE YOU"

Having heard that one of the finest views among the mountains was to be had at Indian Head,
a vast overhanging precipice facing toward the entrance to the Kaaterskill Clove, Graydon easily
induced Madge to explore with him the tangled paths which led thither.

How his eyes exulted over her as she tripped on before him down the steep, winding, rocky paths!
As he followed he often wondered where her feet had found their secure support, so rugged was
the way. Yet on she glanced before him, swaying, bending to avoid branches, or pushing them
aside, her motions instinct with vitality and natural grace.

Once, however, he had a fright. She was taking a deep descent swiftly, when her skirt caught
on a stubborn projecting stump of a sapling, and it appeared that she would fall headlong;
but by some surprising, self-recovering power, which seemed exerted even in the act of falling,
she lay before him in the path, almost as if reclining easily upon her elbow, and was nearly
on her feet again before he could reach her side.

"Are you hurt?" he asked, most solicitously, brushing off the dust from her dress.

"Not in the least," she replied, laughing.

"Well," he exclaimed, "I don't believe you or any one else could do that so handsomely again
if you tried a thousand times! Don't try, please. I carried you the other day some little distance,
and found that you were no longer a little ghost."

"You carried me, Graydon? I thought the people from the farmhouse came."

"Oh, I didn't wait for them! I was half beside myself."

"Evidently," she replied, a little coolly.

Her tone made him falter in his purpose, and when at last they reached Indian Head, she was
so resolutely impersonal in her talk, and had so much to say about the history and the legends
of the region of which she had read, that he felt that she was in no mood for what he intended
to say. As the time passed he grew nervously apprehensive over his project, and at last they
started on their return with his plan unfulfilled. They agreed to try a path to their left,
which was scarcely distinguishable, and it soon appeared to end at a point that sloped almost
perpendicularly to a wild gorge that ran up between the hills.

"That must be what is down on the map as Tamper Clove," said Madge; "and do you know, some
think that it was up that valley Irving made poor Rip carry the heavy keg? Oh, I wish we could
get down into it and go back that way!"

"Let me explore;" and he began swinging himself down by the aid of saplings and smaller growth.
"Some one has passed here recently," he called back, "for trees are freshly blazed and branches
broken. Yes," he cried, a moment later; "here is a well-defined path leading up the clove toward
the hotel. Do you think you dare attempt it?"

"Certainly," she answered; and before he could reach her she was half-way down the descent.

"Madge!" he cried, in alarm.

"Oh, don't worry," she said; "I was over worse places in the West."

"Well, what can't she do!" he exclaimed, as she stood beside him in the path.

"I can't give up my own way very easily," she replied. "You have found that out."

"That don't trouble me in the least. I don't wish you to give up your own way. It's warm down
here, and our walk won't be so breezy as if we had followed the ridge."

"We will take it leisurely and have a rest by and by."

The gorge grew narrower and wilder. They passed an immense tree, under which Indians may have
bivouacked, and in some storm long past the lightning had plowed its way from the topmost branch
to its gnarled roots.

At last the path crossed a little rill that tinkled with a faint murmur among the stones, making
a limpid pool here and there. Immense bowlders, draped with varied-hued mosses and lichens,
were scattered about, where in ages past the melting glacier had left them. The trees that
densely shaded the place seemed primeval in their age, loftiness, and shaggy girth.

"Oh, what a deliciously cool and lovely spot!" cried Madge, throwing down her alpenstock. "Get
me some oak leaves, Graydon, and I will make you a cup and give you a drink."

In a moment she made a fairy chalice with the aid of little twigs, and when she handed it to
him, dripping with water, his hand trembled as he took it.

"Why, Graydon," she exclaimed, "what on earth makes you so nervous?"

"I am not used to climbing, and I suppose my hand has a little tremor from fatigue."

"You poor thing! Here is a mossy rock on which you can imitate Rip. You have only to imagine
that my leaf goblet is the goblin flagon of Irving's legend."

"Where and what would you be after twenty years?"

"Probably a wrinkled spinster at Santa Barbara."

"You wouldn't go away and leave me?"

"Certainly I would, if I couldn't wake you up."

He looked into her mirthful eyes and lovely face. Oh, how lovely it was, flushed from heat
and climbing! "Madge," he said, impetuously, "you have waked me--every faculty of my soul,
every longing of my heart. Will you be my wife?"

Her face grew scarlet. She sprang to her feet, and asked, with half serious, half comic dismay,
"Will I be your what!"

"I asked you to be my wife," he began, confusedly.

"Oh, Graydon, this is worse than asking me to be your sister!" she replied, laughing. "Your
alternations fairly make me dizzy."

"Truly, Madge," he stammered, "a man can scarcely pay a woman a greater compliment--"

"Oh, it's a compliment!" she interrupted.

"No," he burst out, with more than his first impetuosity; "I'm in earnest. You, who almost
read my thoughts, know that I am in earnest--that--"

By a strong yet simple gesture she checked him.

"You scarcely realize what you are asking, Graydon," she said, gravely. "I have no doubt your
present emotion is unforced and sincere, but it requires time to prove earnestness. You were
equally sure you were in earnest a short time since, and I had little place, comparatively,
in your thoughts."

"But I did not know you then as I do now."

"You thought you did. You had vivid impressions then about me, and more vivid about another
woman. You are acting now under another impression, and from impulse. If I ever give myself
away it shall not be in response to an impulse."

"Madge, you misjudge me--" he began, hotly.

"I think I know most of the facts, and you know how matter-of-fact I am. You may think I do
not know what love is, but I do. It is a priceless thing. It is a woman's life, and all that
makes a true woman's life. It is something that one cannot always give at will, or wisely;
but if I had the power to give it at all, it should be to a man who had earned the right to
ask it, and not to one who, within a few short days, had formed new impressions about me. Love
is not the affection of a friend, or even of a sister. There is no necessity for me to marry."

"Then you refuse me?" he said, a little stiffly.

"Certainly I refuse you, Graydon. Has my manner led you to think that I was eager for a chance
to accept you?"

"Oh, no, indeed! You have checked my slightest tendencies toward sentiment."

"Thank you for the assurance. I do not care in the least for sentiment."

His airy fabric of hope, of almost certainty, had been shattered so suddenly that he was overwhelmed.
There seemed but one conclusion.

"Madge," he said, in a low, hoarse voice, "answer me, yes or no. You loved some one at Santa
Barbara who did not return your love? That is your trouble of which Mrs. Wendall spoke--I could
not help hearing her words--that is the mystery about you which has been haunting me with increasing
perplexity; that was the sorrow I heard in your voice the evening you sang in the chapel, and
which has vaguely, yet strongly, moved me since? Tell me, is it not so? Tell me, as a friend,
that I may be a truer friend."

She had turned away in a manner that confirmed his thought.

"You are suggesting a humiliating confession, Graydon."

"Yes, humiliating to the man who saw you, knew you, yet did not love you. Tell me, Madge. It
will make my own course clearer."

"Yes, then," she replied.

He sighed deeply, and was silent for a few moments.

"Madge," he at last resumed, "look at me. I wish to tell you something."

She turned slowly toward him, and he saw that her lip was trembling, and that tears were gathering
in her eyes.

"You may think me cruel in wringing such a confession from you, but perhaps you will forgive
me when you hear all I have to say. You may look upon me now as a creature of impulses and
impressions. The memory of my recent infatuation is fresh in your mind, but you yourself said
I could be straightforward when once I got my bearings. I have them now, and I take my course.
As a friend you have revealed to me much of your woman's nature, and, having known the best,
I shall not look for anything less than yours. I shall be devoted to you through life. I will
be to you all that I can be--all that you will permit. It is said that time heals all wounds.
Perhaps some day--well, if it ever can be, I should be content to take what you could give.
You said I was kind and patient with the little ghost. I should be far kinder, gentler--"

She had felt herself going fast, and had almost yielded to the impulse to exclaim, "You, Graydon,
are the one who did not return my love; and although your love has been so brief and untested
compared with mine, I will trust you;" when voices were heard on the same path by which they
had come, and the figures of other ramblers were seen indistinctly through the foliage.

She gave his hand a strong pressure, seized her alpenstock, and hastened swiftly forward. The
path soon afterward emerged on the public road. The breeze cooled her hot cheeks, kissed away
her tears, and half an hour later they approached the hotel, chatting as quietly as the strictest
conventionality would require.

CHAPTER XXXIX

MY TRUE FRIEND

They found that Mr. Muir had arrived, and no family party in the long supper-room appeared
more free from disturbing thoughts and memories than the one gathered at the banker's table.
In Madge the keen-eyed man could detect nothing that was unusual, and in Graydon only a trace
of the dignity and seriousness which would inevitably follow some deep experience or earnest
purpose. They all spent the evening and the greater part of the following day together, and
Madge was touched more than once by observing that Graydon sought unobtrusively to comply with
even her imagined wishes and to enhance the point and interest of her spoken thoughts.

In answer to his direct question she had acknowledged the absolute truth, and yet it had proved
more misleading than all the disguises which her maidenly reserve had compelled her to adopt.
It seemed now that she would have no further trouble with him--that he had defined his purpose,
and would abide by it. She was glad that she had not yielded to his appeal and rewarded him
in the first consciousness of his new regard for her. This feeling had seemed too recent, tumultuous,
and full of impulse, and did not accord with her earnest, chastened spirit, that had attained
the goal of its hope by such patient endeavor. She preferred that the first strong outflow
from his heart should find wide, deep channels, and that his love for her should take the same
recognized place in his life that her love had occupied so long in her own. She also had a
genuine and feminine reluctance that the suitor of Stella Wildmere should be known as her lover
so speedily, and something more and deeper than good taste was the cause of her aversion.

Yet she was exceedingly happy. The hope that had sustained her so long, that had been so nearly
lost, now seemed certain of fulfilment, and no one but she and God knew how much this truth
meant. Only He had been her confidant, and she felt that she had been sustained in her struggle
from weakness to strength by a Power that was not human, and guided during the past weeks by
a wisdom beyond her own.

"He has proved to me a good Father," was her simple belief. "He led me to do the best I could
for myself, and then did the rest. I also am sure He would have sustained me had I failed utterly.
That my life would not have been vain and useless was shown when I saved little Nellie Wilder."

Thus it may be seen that she was quite unlike many good people. In her consciousness God was
not a being to be worshipped decorously and then counted out from that which made her real
life and hope.

The future now stretched away full of rest and glad assurance. Graydon's manner already began
to fulfil his promise. He would quietly accept the situation as he understood it, and she saw
already the steadying power of an unselfish, unfaltering purpose. He appeared by years an older
and a graver man, and when he sat by her during the service in the wide parlor, there was not
a trace of his old flippant irreverence. Whatever he now believed, he had attained the higher
breeding which respects what is sacred to others.

She had but little compunction over his self-sacrificing mood. It was perfectly clear that
by quiet, manly devotion he proposed to help "time heal the wound" made by that "idiot" at
Santa Barbara, and she that she could gradually reveal to him so much improvement that equanimity
and at last hope would find a place in his mind.

They parted Monday morning with a brief, strong pressure of hands, which Graydon felt conveyed
volumes of sympathy and mutual understanding. She had said that he could write to her, and
he found he had so much to say that he had to put a strong constraint upon himself.

Mr. Muir had watched them curiously during his stay in the mountains, and felt that something
had occurred which he could not fathom. Graydon's manner at parting and since, during business
hours, had confirmed this impression. He was almost as grave and reticent as the banker himself,
and the latter began to chafe and grow irritable over the problem which he was bent on seeing
solved in but one way. He looked askance and discontentedly at Graydon during dinner in the
evening. When they were alone he was fidgety and rather curt in his remarks. At last he burst
out, "Confound it! What has happened between you and Madge?"

"She has refused me, that's all," was the quiet reply.

Mr. Muir gave a low whistle.

"Oh, I understood you the other evening," resumed Graydon. "The phenomenal penetration on which
you so pride yourself is at fault for once."

The banker was so nonplused that he permitted his cigar to go out, but he soon reached the
conclusion, "He has bungled." "Well," he asked at last, "what do you propose to do?"

"To be to her all that she will ever permit, and die a bachelor for her sake if I must."

Mr. Muir lighted his Havana again and puffed in silence for a while, then said, "I like that.
Your purpose is clearly defined. In business and everything else there is solid comfort in
knowing what you can depend upon."

Madge's replies to Graydon's letters were scarcely more than notes, but they were breezy little
affairs, fragrant with the breath of the mountains, and had an excellent tonic effect in the
hot city. They usually contained a description of what she had seen or of some locality visited.
On one occasion she wrote:

"Late in the afternoon there had been a shower, not gentle and pattering, but one of those
frightful, passionate outbursts which are not infrequent in these mountains. The wind appeared
to drive black masses of clouds from all directions save one, which, meeting over the height
occupied by the hotel, discharged torrents of rain. At last the wind left the writhing trees
in peace, and carried the deeply shadowing cloud away beyond the hills. The sun broke forth,
and nature began some magic work. Calling the mist fairies to her aid, she gathered from every
ravine and clove delicate airy clouds, which formed a large and rapidly increasing mass of
vapor. Soon the plain below--the wide Hudson valley--was entirely shut out, as though a great
white curtain had dropped from the sky to the mountain's base. Just then the setting sun, which
had been temporarily obscured, shone forth in glorious brightness, casting on the beautiful
cloud-curtain the dark, clearly defined shadow of the mountain-top, with its crown of buildings,
even the towers and turrets showing with startling distinctness. It was like a mammoth, well-cut
cameo, or a gigantic magic lantern effect, with the sun as a calcium light.

"The spectacle lasted only a few moments. Then the cloudy curtain parted, and the valley of
the Hudson was seen again, spanned by a rainbow."

The days lengthened into weeks, Graydon coming every Friday afternoon, and wondering slightly
at the demurely radiant face that greeted him. "Truly," he thought, "in the words of the old
hymn she 'puts a cheerful courage on.'"

At times, however, she would be a little pensive. Then his tones would have a greater depth
and gentleness, and his sympathy was very sweet, although she felt a little guilty because
she was in no need of it. She could stifle her compunction by thinking:

"There was such a long, weary time when I did need it, and was desolate because of its absence,
that I must have a little now to offset those gray, lonely days."

She had thought she loved him before, but as she saw him patiently and unselfishly seeking
to brighten her life in every possible way, with no better hope than that at some time in the
indefinite future she might give him what was left of her heart after the old fire had died
out, her former affection seemed as pale and shadowy as she was herself when first she learned
that she had a woman's heart.

Late one Friday afternoon he startled her by asking abruptly, "Madge, what has become of that
fellow out West?"

"Please don't speak about that again," she faltered.

"Oh, well, certainly not, if you don't wish me to; but I thought if there was any chance--"

"Chance for what, Graydon?"

"Confound him! I don't suppose I could do anything. I want to make you happy, Madge. I feel
just like taking the idiot by the ear, bringing him to you, and saying, 'There, you unconscionable
fool, look at that girl--' You know what I mean. I'm suggesting the spirit, not the letter
of my action. But, Madge, believe me, if I could help you at any cost to myself--"

"Is your regard for me, of which you spoke, so slight that you could go to work deliberately
to bring that man to me?"

"There is no regard about it. My love for you is so great that I would do anything to make
you happy."

"Madge," called the voice of Mrs. Muir, who was following them with her husband, "where are
you and Graydon?"

"Here!" cried Madge, springing up. Then she gave her hand to him, and he saw that there were
tears in her eyes. "Graydon," she said, "I couldn't ask a stronger test than that. I can't
tell you how I appreciate it. I shall never impose any such task upon you."

"Don't hesitate on my account. I admit that it would be harder than one of the labors of Hercules,
but you command me now and always. Nothing is so bad as to know that you are unhappy."

"Do I seem very unhappy?"

"No, you brave little woman! but who could guess the truth if you were? My knowledge is not
derived from your usual manner."

"It is a pity if I cannot be patient when you set me so good an example," she said, as Mr.
and Mrs. Muir approached.

When they were alone again for a brief time during the ramble, Graydon resumed: "I wish to
make sure of your confidence, Madge; I wish you to take me at my word. I don't think you have
been quite just to me. I am not a cold-blooded fellow, and, no doubt, am given to impressions
and impulses; but I think constancy is one of my traits. I never wavered in my affection for
you until I misunderstood you immediately after my return, and then that very misapprehension
kept me worried and perplexed much of the time. I was true to Miss Wildmere as long as there
was anything to be constant to, and yet for years she was scarcely anything more than a fancy,
a preference. Since my return you know just what she was to me. Nothing is more certain than
that I never loved her. I did not know what the word meant then. There is a chapter in your
history that I don't know much about, but I am sure I could make good my word to do anything
within my power to bring you happiness. I have imagined that a little management, guided by
tact and absolute fidelity--"

"Don't say anything more about that, Graydon," she said, firmly. "Not if my heart broke a thousand
times would I seek a man or permit him to be sought for me in any such way as you suggest."

"That's settled, then."

"That's settled forever."

"Well, in that case," he said, with a short, nervous laugh, "there may be a chance for me within
the next hundred years."

"Are you so willing to take a woman who had once given her heart to another?"

"I don't know anything about 'a woman.' I would take you, Madge, under any circumstances that
I can imagine."

"Graydon," said Mrs. Muir, suddenly appearing around a turn in the walk, "what is the matter
with you? Why can't you and Madge keep with us more? For some reason we are getting separated
all the time. This is a lovely spot. Let us sit down here like a family party and have a little
music. I just long to get back home, so that Madge may sing for us as much as we wish. Here
she would attract the attention of strangers, and that ends the matter; and so I feel as if
I had a rare singing bird, but never a song. In this secluded place no others will hear you,
Madge."

"Very well. What do you wish? I feel like singing."

"Make your own choice."

"I'll give you an old song, then, about friendship;" and with notes rivalling those of a hermit-thrush
that had been chanting vespers in the dense woods near by, she sang a quaint melody, her voice
wakening faint echoes from the adjacent rocks. When she came to the last lines she gave Graydon
a shy glance, which seemed to signify, "These words are for you."

  "Kinder than Love is my true friend.
  He'd die for me if that would end
  My sorrow. Yes, would live for me--
  Suffer and live unselfishly,
  And that for him would harder be
  Than at my feet to die for me."

As she ceased she again encountered his steadfast gaze with a glance which said, "Have I not
done you justice?"

He was satisfied, and felt that the presence of his relatives had secured a sweeter answer
than might otherwise have been given--an answer that contained all he could hope for then.

"Humph!" ejaculated Mr. Muir, very discontentedly.

"What an appreciative remark, Henry!" said Madge, laughing.

"It was; and it expressed my views," said the banker, dryly. "Come, Mary, let us go home to
supper."

"Now, I think the song very pretty," said Mary, "only there are no such people nowadays."

As Madge followed with Graydon she continued laughing softly to herself.

"You are not hiding vexation at Henry?" Graydon asked.

"Oh, no, I understand Henry. You think I am always hiding something. You at least should have
understood my song."

"Yes, Madge," he said, gravely, "and you also made it clear that you understood me. I am content."

She laughed, imitating the ejaculation.

"Henry's 'humph!' was too rich for anything. It meant volumes. What sentimental fools he thinks
us to be!"

"Henry could no more understand such a song than sing it," was Graydon's somewhat irritable
response.

"No matter. Such men are invaluable in the world. My nature is very much in accord with Henry's,
and so far as he has had experience, he is very sound."

"With your saving clause in mind, I agree with you perfectly about Henry, but not about yourself.
Your nature, Madge, like your voice, has a wide compass."

With this one exception there was no other spoken reference during the remainder of the summer
to the attitude toward her which he now maintained in thought and action. The season was drawing
to a close, and she had enjoyed the latter part of it beyond her fondest hopes and expectations.
She made a few congenial acquaintances at the hotel, and with them never wearied in exploring
the paths that converged at the great caravansary, and in visiting the various outlooks from
which the same wide landscapes presented ever-changing aspects. Chief among these friends was
a middle-aged artist, who was deeply imbued with the genius of the mountains, and who had no
little skill in catching and idealizing the lovely effects he saw. He proved her best guide,
for he had long haunted the region, and the majority of the paths were due to his taste and
explorations. In such congenial tasks he acted as agent for the sagacious and liberal owner
of the vast property, who was so wise that in his dealings with nature he employed one that
loved and understood her. To Madge the artist showed his favorite nooks and haunts, where the
wild beauty of the hills dwelt like a living presence, and the scenery not yet painted which,
from certain standpoints, almost composed itself on the canvas. Thus he taught her to see the
region somewhat as he did, and to find in the general beauty definite, natural pictures that
were like flowers in the wilderness. She greatly enjoyed watching with him the wonderful moonlight
effects on the vast shaggy sides and summit of High Peak, that reared its almost untrodden
solitudes opposite the hotel. This mountain was the favorite haunt of fantastic clouds. Sometimes
in the form of detached mists they would pass up rapidly like white spectres from the vast
chasm of the Kaaterskill. Again a heavy mass would settle on the whole length of the mountain,
the outlines of which would be lost, and the whole take the semblance of one vast height crowned
with the moon's radiance. Nothing fascinated Madge more than to observe how the artist caught
the essential elements of beauty in the changing cloud scenery and reproduced the effects on
a few inches of canvas, and in her better appreciation of similar scenery thereafter, she saw
how true it is that art may be the interpreter of nature.

The fine music and varied entertainments at the house served also to beguile her time. On one
occasion the young people were arranging a series of tableaux, and she was asked to personate
Jephtha's daughter. When the curtain rose on her lovely face and large, dark eyes, the Hebrew
maiden and her pathetic history grew into vivid reality against the dim background of the past.

After all, the time that intervened between Monday and Friday afternoon was spent in waiting,
and even the hours toward the last were counted. The expression in Graydon's dark blue eyes
was always the same when he greeted her, and recalled the line:

  "Kinder than Love is my true friend."

On Saturdays they took long tramps, seeking objective points far beyond the range of ordinary
ramblers.

CHAPTER XL

THE END OF THE WOOING

Madge had often turned wistful eyes toward High Peak, and on the last Saturday before their
final return to the city she said to Graydon, "Dare we attempt it? Perhaps if we gave the day
to the climb, and took it leisurely--"

"There's no 'perhaps' about it. We'll go if you wish. I should like nothing better than to
get lost with you."

"There is no danger of getting lost," she replied, hastily. "The hotel must be visible from
the whole line of its summit, and I am told that there is a path to the top of the mountain."

"I will be ready in half an hour," he said.

It was a lovely day in early September. The air was soft, yet cool and bracing enough to make
climbing agreeable. Graydon had a lunch basket, which he could sling over his shoulder, well
filled, and ordered a carriage. "There is no need of our tramping over the intervening miles
of dusty roads which must be passed before we begin our climb," he said, "and the distance
we ride will make a pleasant drive for Mary and the children."

Madge and Graydon reached the summit without any great difficulty, Mary having returned with
the assurance that they would find their own way back to the hotel.

As the hours passed, Graydon began to gather more hope than he had dared to entertain since
his shattered theory had so disheartened him. In spite of his fancied knowledge about Madge,
it was hard to believe she was very unhappy that morning. There was an elasticity to her step,
a ring of genuine gladness in her tones and laugh, which did not suggest that she was consciously
carrying a heavy burden.

"She certainly is the bravest and most unselfish girl I ever imagined," he thought, as they
left the highest point after enjoying the view. "With an art so inimitable as to be artless,
she has tried to give me enjoyment. Instead of regarding herself as one to be entertained,
she has been pouring forth words, fancies, snatches of song like sparkling wine, and I am exhilarated
instead of being wearied."

When at last they found a spring at which to eat their lunch, he told her so, concluding, "This
mountain air does you good, Madge."

"So do you," she replied, with a piquant nod. "Don't be conceited when I tell you that you
are good company."

"No; but I can't help being happy."

"Oh, indeed! It doesn't seem to take much to make you happy."

"Not very much from you."

"Pass me a biscuit, Graydon; I want something more substantial than fine speeches after our
climb. Isn't all this truly Arcadian--this mossy rug on which we have placed our lunch, the
trees whispering about us overhead, and the spring there bubbling over with something concerning
which it murmurs so contentedly?"

"I wonder what they think of us! I can imagine one thing."

"You are always imagining. The idea of your being a banker! Well, there is a loud whisper from
the trees. What was remarked?"

"That yonder little girl doesn't look so very unhappy."

"No, Graydon," she said, earnestly, "you make Saturdays and Sundays very bright to me. No girl
ever had a truer friend than you are becoming."

"Have become, Madge."

"Graydon," she said, eagerly, as if hastening from dangerous ground, "the hotel is there just
opposite to us. Don't you think we could scramble down the mountain here, and return by Kaaterskill
Clove and the Falls? It would be such fun, and save such a very long distance!"

"We'll try it," he said.

"Come," she resumed, brusquely, "you are spoiling me. You say yes to everything. If you don't
think it safe or best you must not humor me."

"We can soon learn whether it's safe and practicable, and there is no danger of losing our
way. We have only to return over the mountain in order to strike the path somewhere at right
angles."

"Let us hasten, then. I am in the mood to end our sojourn in the Catskills by an hour or two
of contact with nature absolutely primitive. The scenes we shall pass through will be so pleasant
to think of by a winter fire."

"Winter fire? That's capital! You are not going back to Santa Barbara, Madge?"

"I haven't promised that--I haven't promised anything."

"No; I have done all the promising."

"You did so of your own free will."

"And of my own free will shall keep my promises. No, don't let us leave any remnants of our
lunch. Should we get lost you will want something more substantial than fine speeches."

"I shall indeed."

Graydon filled from the spring the bottle which had contained milk; and then packing his little
hamper he led the way downward, over and through obstacles which often involved no little difficulty,
and sometimes almost danger. 

He transformed parsons into laymen, because he transformed laymen
into parsons.

He liberated men from outward religiosity, because he made religiosity
an inward affair of the heart.

He emancipated the body from chains, because he laid chains upon the heart.

But if Protestantism is not the true solution, it was the true formulation
of the problem.

The question was no longer a struggle between the layman and the parson external to him; it was
a struggle with his own inner parson, his parsonic nature. And if the protestant transformation
of German laymen into parsons emancipated the lay popes, the princes, together with their clergy, the
privileged and the philistines, the philosophic transformation of
the parsonic Germans into men will emancipate the people.

But little as emancipation stops short of the princes, just as little will the secularization
of property stop short of church robbery, which was chiefly set on foot by the hypocritical
Prussians.

Then the Peasants' War, the most radical fact of German history, came to grief on the reef of
theology. To-day, when theology itself has come to grief, the most servile fact of German history,
our status quo, will be shivered on the rock of philosophy.

The day before the Reformation, official Germany was the most abject vassal of Rome. The day before
its revolution, it is the abject vassal of less than Rome, of Prussia
and Austria, of country squires and philistines.

Meanwhile there seems to be an important obstacle to a radical German revolution.

Revolutions in fact require a passive element, a material foundation.

Theory becomes realized among a people only in so far as it represents the realization of that
people's needs. Will the immense cleavage between the demands of the German intellect and the
responses of German actuality now involve a similar cleavage of middle-class society from
the State, and from itself? Will theoretical needs merge directly into practical needs? It is not
enough that the ideas press towards realization; reality itself must stimulate to thinking.

But
Germany did not pass through the middle stages of political emancipation simultaneously with the
modern nations.

Even the stages which she has overcome theoretically she has not reached practically.

How would she be able to clear with a salto mortale not only her own
obstacles, but at the same time the obstacles of modern nations, obstacles
which she must actually feel to mean a liberation to be striven for
from her real obstacles?

A radical revolution can only be the revolution of radical needs, whose preliminary conditions
appear to be wholly lacking.

Although Germany has only accompanied the development of nations with
the abstract activity of thought, without taking an active part in
the real struggles incident to this development, she has, on the other
hand, shared in the suffering incident to this development, without
sharing in its enjoyments, or their partial satisfaction.

Abstract activity on the one side corresponds to abstract suffering on the other side.

Consequently, one fine day Germany will find herself at the level of European decay, before she
has ever stood at the level of European emancipation.

The phenomenon may be likened to a fetish-worshipper, who succumbs
to the diseases of Christianity.

Looking upon German governments, we find that, owing to contemporary conditions, the situation
of Germany, the standpoint of German culture and finally their own
lucky instincts, they are driven to combine the civilized shortcomings
of the modern State world, whose advantages we do not possess, with
the barbarous shortcomings of the ancien régime, which we enjoy in
full measure, so that Germany is constantly obliged to participate,
if not intelligently, at any rate unintelligently, in the State formations
which lie beyond her status quo.

Is there for example a country in the world which shares so naïvely
in all the illusions of the constitutional community, without sharing
in its realities, as does so-called constitutional Germany?

Was it necessary to combine German governmental interference, the tortures of the censorship,
with the tortures of the French September laws which presupposed freedom of the press? Just
as one found the gods of all nations in the Roman pantheon, so will one find the flaws of all
State forms in the Holy Roman German Empire.


This mental anguish and the effort he put forth to respond to these words caused great beads
of sweat to start out upon his face. Suddenly, as if a giant hand was lifted, the effects of
the shock resulting from his fall passed away. He opened his eyes, and there was Madge, with
her face buried upon his breast, in brief oblivion from fears that threatened to crush at once
hope and life.

To his great joy he found that he could move. Feebly, and with great difficulty, he lifted
her head and tried to regain his feet. He found this impossible, and soon realized that his
leg was broken. He now saw that he must act wisely and carefully, or their plight would be
serious indeed; and yet his mind was in such a tumult of immeasurable joy at his discovery
that he would not in the least regret the accident, if assured of her safety.

At last, in response to his efforts, she began to revive. The sense of responsibility, the
necessity for action on her part, had been so great immediately before she had fainted under
the stress of one overwhelming fear, that her mind, even during unconsciousness, may have put
forth effort to regain its hold upon sense. She found herself leaning against a prostrate tree,
and Graydon sitting near, speaking to her in soothing and encouraging tones.

In response to her bewildered, troubled look of inquiry, he said, cheerfully, and in natural
tones, "Don't worry, Madge, or be frightened."

"What has happened, Graydon?"

"I'll tell you what I know, and you must supply the rest. We were proceeding along that ledge
above us, and trying to find a safe place to climb down."

A slow deep color began to take the place of her pallor, showing that her own memory was supplying
all that had occurred.

"You know I fell, Madge. Thank God, I did not carry you down with me!"

"Any other man would," she said, almost brusquely. "You threw my hand back around a tree."

"Did I?" exclaimed Graydon, very innocently and gladly. "Well, everything became very confused
after that. I must have been unconscious. I do remember grasping at the branches as I passed
through these low trees above us--"

"You must have caught one of them, Graydon," she said, eagerly, turning toward him again, "for
a large limb had broken off and was lying upon you."

"Was it so? Perhaps I owe it a good turn, for it may have so broken my fall as to have saved
my life. Well, in some way, you, true, brave little girl, you must have reached me, and, finding
that you could not restore me, and imagining I was dead or dying, you fainted yourself from
the nervous shock of it all. When I recovered the use of my senses I found evidence that you
had been trying to revive me. Now, Madge, we must both be brave and sensible. We must regain
the full possession of our wits as soon as possible. Can you be very brave and sensible (to
use your favorite word) if I tell you something?"

"Yes, Graydon," she said. "I can do anything, now that I know you are going to live."

"I am very much alive, and shall be thoroughly conscious of the fact for some time to come.
You must keep perfectly cool and rational, for what has happened is a very serious affair under
the circumstances." Her scarlet face was turned from him again. "Madge," he concluded, in quiet
tones, "I've broken my leg."

"Is that all?" she said, with a look of intense relief.

"Isn't that enough? I'm helpless."

"I'm not," and she sprang to her feet "Why, Graydon, it might have been a hundred-fold worse.
I thought it was immeasurably worse," she said, suppressing a sob. "You might have been killed.
See how far you fell! I feared you might have received some terrible internal injury--"

"I have; but that's a chronic affair, as you know," he interrupted, laughing.

His mirth and allusion did more to restore her than all else, for he appeared the same friend
that she thought she had lost.

"Now that it is so evident that you will survive all your injuries," she resumed, with an answering
laugh, "I am myself again. You direct me what to do."

"I shall, indeed, have to depend on you almost wholly; and the fact that another must look
to you in such a strait will do more to keep you up than all cordials and stimulants. I can
do very little myself--"

"Forgive me, Graydon. You know I am not indifferent. Are you in much pain?" and her voice was
very gentle.

"Not yet. You must act contrary to your instincts for once, and exert all your ingenuity to
attract attention. First, we must have a fire; meanwhile I shall light a cigar, which will
help me to think and banish the impression that we are lost babes in the woods. The smoke,
you see, will draw eyes to this spot--the smoke of the fire, I mean."

"I'm following you correctly."

"You must have followed me very bravely, heroic little woman that you are! You are indeed unlike
other girls, who would never have reached me except by tumbling after--"

"Come, no more reminiscences till you are safe at the hotel, and your leg mended."

"Very well. I direct, but you command. As soon as we have a column of smoke ascending from
this point you must try to find an open space near here, and wave something white as a signal
of distress."

He had scarcely concluded before she was at work. The prostrate tree against which he had managed
to place her at such pain to his broken limb served as a back-log, and soon a column of smoke
was ascending. At times she would turn a shy, half-doubting, half-questioning glance at him,
but he would smile so naturally and speak so frankly that the suspicion that he had heard her
words almost passed from her mind.

"Madge," he said, "in finding an outlook toward the hotel or valley, don't go far away, if
possible. It makes me awfully nervous to think of you climbing alone."

She found a projecting rock beneath them within calling distance, and on an extemporized pole
she fastened the napkins. At his suggestion she waved them only downward and upward, at the
same time sending out her powerful voice from time to time in a cry for help.

He, left alone, sometimes groaned from an unusually severe twinge of pain, and again laughed
softly to himself over the situation. He knew that the question of their being sought and found
was only one of time, and he would have been willing to have had all his bones broken should
this have been needful to secure the knowledge which now thrilled his very soul with gladness.
The past grew perfectly clear, and the pearl of a woman who had given herself to him so long
ago gained a more priceless value with every moment's thought, "Ah, sweet Madge! I'm the blessed
idiot you loved and toiled for at Santa Barbara! I shouldn't have believed that such a thing
could happen in this humdrum world."

Nor would it seem that the attention of even a fraction of that great world could be obtained.
The shadows of evening began to gather, and Madge, at Graydon's call, returned, wearied and
somewhat discouraged.

"Cheer up," he said. "It is only a question of time. We shall soon be missed, and our signals
will be more effective when it is dark. See, we shall not starve. I have been getting supper
for you. Keeping the remnants of our lunch wasn't a bad idea, was it?"

"Keeping up your courage and mine is a better one. Graydon, I fear you are suffering very much."

"Oh, Madge, armies of men have broken their legs! That's nothing but a little disagreeable
prose, while this adventure with you is something to talk and laugh over all our lives. I've
cut my boot off and bandaged my leg as well as I could, and am now hungry. That's a good sign.
I shall be positively hilarious if you make as good supper as this meagre spread permits. Take
a little water, for your throat must be parched. You will have to drink it from the bottle,
Pat's fashion, for my rubber cup is broken."

"Indeed, a little water is all I want at present, and I must gather wood for the fire before
it is darker."

"Very well," he said, laughing; "supper shall wait for you."

The vicinity appeared as if never before visited, and there was an abundance of dead and decaying
wood lying about. When she had secured a large quantity of this she came and sat down by the
fire, and said, "I will take a little supper now, and then it will be so dark that we can signal
in some other way."

"Madge," said Graydon, earnestly, "it has cut me to the heart to lie helplessly here and see
you doing work so unsuitable."

"Nothing could be more suitable under the circumstances. You do think we shall be found soon?
Oh, I'm so worried about you!"

"More, then, than I am about myself. I shall have to play invalid for some time. Won't you
be my nurse occasionally?"

"Yes, Graydon, all I can."

"Why, then, don't worry about me at all. The prospect makes me fairly happy. Come, now, eat
the whole of that sandwich."

She complied, looking thoughtfully into the fire meanwhile. By the light of the flickering
blaze he saw the trouble and worry pass from her brow and the expression of her face grow as
quiet and contented as that of a child's. At last she said, "Well, this does seem cosey and
companionable, in spite of everything. There, forgive me, Graydon; I forgot for the moment
that you were in pain."

"Was I? I forgot it, too. Sitting there in the firelight, you suggested the sweetest picture
I ever hope to see."

"You can't be in extremis when you begin to compliment."

"Don't you wish to know what the picture was?"

"Oh, yes, if it will help you pass the time!"

"I saw you sitting by a hearth, and I thought, 'If that hearth were mine it would be the loveliest
picture the world had known.' Now you see what an egotist I am. You look so enchanting in that
firelight that I cannot resist--I would try so hard to be worthy of you, Madge. Make your own
terms again, as I said once to you before."

"My own terms?" she repeated, turning a sudden and searching glance upon him. "Then tell me,
did you hear what I said this afternoon when I first found you?"

He hesitated a moment, and then said, firmly: "Yes, every word; but, Madge, you must not punish
me for what I could not help. It would not be right."

"Could you hear me and yet--"

"I could hear you and yet could not move a muscle until you fainted, and then my intense mental
excitement and solicitude must have broken the paralysis caused by the shock of my fall. Oh,
Madge, look at me! Only a false pride can come between us now. My love is not worthy to be
compared with yours, but it is genuine, and it will--it will last as long as I do. I shall
bless this accident and all the pain I must suffer if they bring you to me."

She sprang to his side, and putting her arm around his neck said, "Graydon, on the evening
after your return I told you I couldn't be your sister. You know why now, and you uttered these
words, 'I shall have to take you as you are if I ever find out.' I meant to win you if I could,
but only by being such a girl as I thought you would love. Now you know the mystery of the
little ghost, and you can bring to me that 'idiot' who didn't return my love, as often as you
choose."

"Thank Heaven for what I escaped! Thank God for what I have won!" he exclaimed.

"Won? Nonsense! You have been won, not I. Oh, Graydon, wouldn't you have been amazed and horrified
if you had been told, years ago, that the little ghost would go deliberately to work to woo
a man and take him from another girl? Think how dreadful it sounds! but you shall now know
the worst."

"It's music that will fill my life with gladness. How exquisitely fine your nature is, that
you could do this with such absolute maidenly reserve! Suppose I had become Stella Wildmere's
bondman?"

"I should have gone back to Santa Barbara, and kept my secret."

"Horrible!"

"I said you knew all, but I am mistaken. Now, don't be shocked back into your kind of unconsciousness
again. I did another horrid thing. I listened and learned about the plot by which Arnault meant
to bring Miss Wildmere to a decision against you;" and she told him the circumstances, and
what had passed between herself and Henry.

His arm tightened around her almost convulsively. "Madge," he cried, "you have not only brought
me happiness--you have saved me from a bitter, lifelong self-reproach far worse than poverty.
How can I ever show sufficient devotion in return for all this?"

"By being sensible, and telling me how to make signals, now that it is as dark as it will be
this moonlight night."

"Let me lean on you, as I ever shall figuratively hereafter. We will go down to the outlook
you found, build another fire, and wave burning brands."

This was done. Henry Muir, who had grown very solicitous, saw their signals, and promptly organized
a rescuing party. A wood-road led well up toward their position, and with the aid of some employés
of the house he at last rescued them. Graydon was weak and exhausted from pain by the time
he reached the hotel, yet felt that his happiness had been purchased at very slight cost. You are
breaking your parole and risking shame for me. Nay, you have shamed me already. Polly is here."

"Polly
is a good girl; she understands. A word, then, if you must drive me away."

"Your parole!"

"I can pass the sentries. No fear of the patrol hereabouts. Your hand-- let down your hand to me.
I can reach it from the parapet here--with my fingers only, not with my lips, though even that
you never forbade!"

Weakly, she lowered her arm over the sill. He reached to touch it, and she leaned her face towards
his--hers in shadow, his pale in the moonlight.

Before their fingers met, a yellow flame leapt from the angle to the left; a loud report banged
in her ears and echoed across the park; and Raoul, after swaying a second, pitched forward with
a sharp cry and rolled to the foot of the glacis.

Dorothea forced herself back in the room, and stood there upright and shook, with Polly beside
her holding her two hands.

"They have shot him!"

The two women listened for a moment. All was still now. Polly stepped to the window and, closed
it softly.

"But why? What are you doing?" Dorothea asked, in a hoarse whisper.

"They will find quite enough without that," said the practical girl, but her voice quavered.

"Yet
if they had seen--Ah, how selfish to think of that now! Hush-- that
was a groan! He is alive still."

She moved towards the window, but
Polly dragged her back by main force.

"Listen, Miss!"

Below they
heard the sudden unbarring of doors, and Endymion's voice calling
for Mudge, the butler. A bell pealed in the servants' hall, stopped,
and began ringing again in short and violent jerks.

"Let me go,"
commanded Dorothea. "They will never find him, under the slope there.
He may be bleeding to death. I must tell--"

But Polly clung to her.
"They'll find him safe enough, Miss Dorothea. There's Sam, now--hark!--at
the backdoor bell: he'll tell them."

"Sam!"

"Sam Zeally, Miss."

"But
I don't understand," Dorothea stammered; with a sharp suspicion of
treachery, she pushed the girl from her. "Was Zeally mounting guard
tonight? If I thought--don't tell me it was a trap! Oh, you wicked
girl!"

"No; it wasn't," answered Polly, sulkily. "I don't know nothing
of Sam's movements. But he might be hanging about the house; and if
he saw a man talking to me, he's just as jealous as fire."

She broke
off at the sound of voices below the window. The ray of a lantern,
as the search-party jolted it, flashed and danced on wall and ceiling
of the dim boudoir.

"Your offer comes too late. If, instead of being one of the principal actors in that humiliating
little drama of my life, you had stood by me patiently and faithfully, I would have given you
at once my deepest gratitude and, eventually, my love. I did not deserve such constancy, but
I would have rewarded it to the extent of my ability. You thought I was mercenary. I was, and
have been punished; but you forget that you made my mercenary spirit your ally, and kept me
from becoming engaged to the man whom you well knew that I preferred. My regard for him is
not so deep, however, but that I shall survive and face my altered fortunes bravely. If you
had been kind to me during those bitter days--if you had kept my father from failure, instead
of deserting him after he had done his best for you--he did do his best for you--I should have
valued you more than your wealth, and proved it by my life. I have since learned that I am
not afraid of poverty, and that I must find truer friends."

Arnault, like so many others, turned from what "might have been" to his pursuit of gold, but
it had lost its brightness forever.

An old admirer of Stella's, a plain, sturdy business man, to whom she had scarcely given a
thought in her palmy days, eventually renewed his attentions, and won as much love as the girl
probably could have given to any one. By his aid she restored her father's broken fortunes
and established them on a modest but secure basis, and she proved to her husband a sensible
wife, always recognizing that in promoting his best interests and happiness she secured her own.

Dr. Sommers is still the genial physician and the Izaak Walton of the Catskills. Mr. and Mrs.
Wendall are "plodding toward home" with a resignation that is almost cheerful.

Henry Muir continues devoted to business, and his wife is devoted to him. He rarely permits
a suitable opportunity to pass without remarking that the two sisters are the "most sensible
women in the world."

