1642-1660

                                                      PAGE
      CHAPTER IX

        THE CIVIL WAR. 1642-1646                         1

      CHAPTER X

        THE ARMY AND THE PARLIAMENT. 1646-1649          43

      CHAPTER XI

        THE COMMONWEALTH. 1649-1653                     70

      CHAPTER XII

        THE PROTECTORATE. 1653-1660                     92

   BOOK VIII

   THE REVOLUTION. 1660-1760

      CHAPTER I

        THE RESTORATION. 1660-1667                     160

      CHAPTER II

        THE POPISH PLOT. 1667-1683                     244

MAPS

    I. MAP OF MARSTON MOOR[vii:1]             Pages 20, 21

   II. MAP OF NASEBY FIGHT[vii:1]          To face page 38

  III. MAP OF EUROPE, WITH FRANCE AS
         IT WAS UNDER LEWIS XIV.          To face page 293

FOOTNOTES:

[vii:1] By permission of Mr. Markham.

CHAPTER IX

THE CIVIL WAR

1642-1646

[Sidenote: Edgehill.]

The breaking off of negotiations was followed on both sides by preparations for immediate war.
Hampden, Pym, and Holles became the guiding spirits of a Committee of Public Safety which was
created by Parliament as its administrative organ. On the twelfth of July 1642 the Houses ordered
that an army should be raised "for the defence of the king and the Parliament," and appointed
the Earl of Essex as its captain-general and the Earl of Bedford as its general of horse. The
force soon rose to twenty thousand foot and four thousand horse; and English and Scotch officers
were drawn from the Low Countries. The confidence on the Parliamentary side was great. "We
all thought one battle would decide," Baxter confessed after the first encounter; for the king
was almost destitute of money and arms, and in spite of his strenuous efforts to raise recruits
he was embarrassed by the reluctance of his own adherents to begin the struggle. Resolved however
to force on a contest, he raised the Royal Standard at Nottingham "on the evening of a very
stormy and tempestuous day," the twenty-second of August, but the country made no answer to
his appeal. Meanwhile Lord Essex, who had quitted London amidst the shouts of a great multitude
with orders from the Parliament to follow the king, "and by battle or other way rescue him
from his perfidious councillors and restore him to Parliament," was mustering his army at Northampton.
Charles had but a handful of men, and the dash of a few regiments of horse would have ended
the war; but Essex shrank from a decisive stroke, and trusted to reduce the king peacefully
to submission by a show of force. But while Essex lingered Charles fell back at the close of
September on Shrewsbury, and the whole face of affairs suddenly changed. Catholics and Royalists
rallied fast to his standard, and the royal force became strong enough to take the field. With
his usual boldness Charles resolved to march at once on the capital and force the Parliament
to submit by dint of arms. But the news of his march roused Essex from his inactivity. He had
advanced to Worcester to watch the king's proceedings; and he now hastened to protect London.
On the twenty-third of October 1642 the two armies fell in with one another on the field of
Edgehill, near Banbury. The encounter was a surprise, and the battle which followed was little
more than a confused combat of horse. At its outset the desertion of Sir Faithful Fortescue
with a whole regiment threw the Parliamentary forces into disorder, while the Royalist horse
on either wing drove their opponents from the field; but the reserve of Lord Essex broke the
foot, which formed the centre of the king's line, and though his nephew, Prince Rupert, brought
back his squadrons in time to save Charles from capture or flight, the night fell on a drawn
battle.

[Sidenote: Charles at Oxford.]

The moral advantage however rested with the king. Essex had learned that his troopers were
no match for the Cavaliers, and his withdrawal to Warwick left open the road to the capital.
Rupert pressed for an instant march on London, where the approach of the king's forces had
roused utter panic. But the proposal found stubborn opponents among the moderate Royalists,
who dreaded the complete triumph of Charles as much as his defeat; and their pressure forced
the king to pause for a time at Oxford, where he was received with uproarious welcome. When
the cowardice of its garrison delivered Reading to Rupert's horse, and his daring capture of
Brentford in November drew the royal army in his support almost to the walls of the capital,
the panic of the Londoners was already over, and the junction of their train-bands with the
army of Essex forced Charles to fall back again on his old quarters. But though the Parliament
rallied quickly from the blow of Edgehill, the war, as its area widened through the winter,
went steadily for the king. The fortification of Oxford gave him a firm hold on the midland
counties; while the balance of the two parties in the North was overthrown by the march of
the Earl of Newcastle, with a force he had raised in Northumberland, upon York. Lord Fairfax,
the Parliamentary leader in that county, was thrown back by Newcastle's attack on the manufacturing
towns of the West Riding, where Puritanism found its stronghold; and the arrival of the queen
in February 1643 with arms from Holland encouraged the royal army to push its scouts across
the Trent, and threaten the eastern counties, which held firmly for the Parliament. The stress
of the war was shown by the vigorous efforts of the Houses. Some negotiations which had gone
on into the spring were broken off by the old demand that the king should return to his Parliament;
London was fortified; and a tax of two millions a year was laid on the districts which adhered
to the Parliamentary cause.

[Sidenote: The Cornish rising.]

In the spring of 1643 Lord Essex, whose army had been freshly equipped, was ordered to advance
upon Oxford. But though the king held himself ready to fall back on the West, the Earl shrank
from again risking his raw army in an encounter. He confined himself to the recapture of Reading,
and to a month of idle encampment round Brill. But while disease thinned his ranks and the
Royalists beat up his quarters the war went more and more for the king. The inaction of Essex
enabled Charles to send a part of his small force at Oxford to strengthen a Royalist rising
in the West. Nowhere was the royal cause to take so brave or noble a form as among the Cornishmen.
Cornwall stood apart from the general life of England: cut off from it not only by differences
of blood and speech, but by the feudal tendencies of its people, who clung with a Celtic loyalty
to their local chieftains, and suffered their fidelity to the Crown to determine their own.
They had as yet done little more than keep the war out of their own county; but the march of
a small Parliamentary force under Lord Stamford upon Launceston forced them into action. In
May 1643 a little band of Cornishmen gathered round the chivalrous Sir Bevil Greenvil, "so
destitute of provisions that the best officers had but a biscuit a day," and with only a handful
of powder for the whole force; but, starving and outnumbered as they were, they scaled the
steep rise of Stratton Hill, sword in hand, and drove Stamford back on Exeter with a loss of
two thousand men, his ordnance and baggage-train. Sir Ralph Hopton, the best of the Royalist
generals, took the command of their army as it advanced into Somerset, and drew the stress
of the war into the West. Essex despatched a picked force under Sir William Waller to check
their advance; but Somerset was already lost ere he reached Bath, and the Cornishmen stormed
his strong position on Lansdowne Hill in the teeth of his guns. The stubborn fight robbed the
victors of their leaders; Hopton was wounded, Greenvil slain, and with them fell the two heroes
of the little army, Sir Nicholas Slanning and Sir John Trevanion, "both young, neither of them
above eight-and-twenty, of entire friendship to one another, and to Sir Bevil Greenvil." Waller
too, beaten as he was, hung on their weakened force as it moved for aid upon Oxford, and succeeded
in cooping up the foot in Devizes. But in July the horse broke through his lines; and joining
a force which Charles had sent to their relief, turned back, and dashed Waller's army to pieces
in a fresh victory on Roundway Down.

[Sidenote: Hampden and the War.]

The Cornish rising seemed to decide the fortune of the war; and the succours which his queen
was bringing him from the army of the North determined Charles to make a fresh advance upon
London. He was preparing for this advance, when Rupert sallied from Oxford to beat up the quarters
of the army under Essex, which still remained encamped about Thame. Foremost among this Parliamentary
force were the "Greencoats" of John Hampden. From the first outbreak of warfare Hampden had
shown the same energy in the field that he had shown in the Parliament. He had contributed
two thousand pounds to the loan raised by the Houses for the equipment of an army. He had raised
a regiment from among his own tenantry, with the parson of Great Hampden for their chaplain.
The men wore his livery of green, as those of Holles or Brooke or Mandeville wore their leaders'
liveries of red, and purple, and blue; the only sign of their common soldiership being the
orange scarf, the colour of Lord Essex, which all wore over their uniform. From the first the
"Greencoats" had been foremost in the fray. While Essex lay idly watching the gathering of
an army round the king, Hampden was already engaged with the royal outposts. It was the coming
up of his men that turned the day at Edgehill; and that again saved Lord Brooke from destruction
in the repulse of the royal forces at Brentford. It was Hampden's activity that saved Reading
from a second capture. During the gloomy winter, when the fortunes of the Houses seemed at
their worst, his energy redoubled. His presence was as necessary in the Parliament as in the
field; and he was continually on the road between London and Westminster. It was during these
busy months that he brought into practical shape a league which was destined to be the mainstay
of the Parliamentary force. Nowhere was the Puritan feeling so strong as in the counties about
London, in his own Buckinghamshire, in Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, and the more easterly counties
of Huntingdon, Cambridge, and Northampton. Hampden's influence as well as that of his cousin,
Oliver Cromwell, who was already active in the war, was bent to bind these shires together
in an association for the aid of the Parliament, with a common force, a common fund for its
support, and Lord Manchester for its head. The association was at last brought about; and Hampden
turned his energies to reinforcing the army of Essex.

[Sidenote: Rupert's raid.]

The army was strengthened; but no efforts could spur its leader into activity. Essex had learned
his trade in the Thirty Years War; and like most professional soldiers he undervalued the worth
of untrained levies. As a great noble, too, he shrank from active hostilities against the king.
He believed that in the long run the want of money and of men would force Charles to lay down
his arms, and to come to a peaceful understanding with the Parliament. To such a fair adjustment
of the claims of both a victory of the Parliament would, he thought, be as fatal as a victory
of the king. Against this policy of inaction Hampden struggled in vain. It was to no purpose
that he urged Essex to follow Charles after Edgehill, or to attack him after his repulse before
Brentford. It was equally to no purpose that he urged at the opening of 1643 an attack upon
Oxford. Essex drew nearer to the town indeed; but at the news of the queen's junction with
her husband, and of the successes of the Cornishmen, he fell back to his old cantonment about
Thame. Hampden's knowledge of the country warned him of danger from the loose disposition of
the army, and he urged Essex to call in the distant outposts and strengthen his line; but his
warnings were unheeded. So carelessly were the troops scattered about that Rupert resolved
to beat up their quarters; and leaving Oxford in the afternoon of Saturday, the 17th of June,
he seized the bridge over the Thame at Chiselhampton, and leaving a force of foot to secure
his retreat, threw himself boldly with his horsemen into the midst of the Parliamentary army.
Essex with the bulk of his men lay quietly sleeping a few miles to the northward at Thame as
Rupert struck in the darkness through the leafy lanes that led to the Chilterns, and swooped
on the villages that lay beneath their slopes. At three in the morning he fell on the troops
quartered at Postcombe, then on those at Chinnor. Here some fifty were slain, and more taken
prisoners, as they sprang half-naked from their beds. The village was fired, and Rupert again
called his men together to pursue their foray. But the early summer sun had now risen; it was
too late to attack Wycombe as he had purposed; and the horsemen fell back again through Tetsworth
to secure their retreat across the Thame.

[Sidenote: Death of Hampden.]

It was time to think of retreat, for Hampden was already in pursuit. He had slept at Watlington;
but the tidings of the foray in the village hard by roused him from slumber, and he at once
despatched a trooper to Essex to bid the Earl send foot and horse and cut off the Prince from
Chiselhampton bridge. Essex objected and delayed till Hampden's patience broke down. The thought
of his own village blazing in that Sunday dawn, his own friends and tenants stretched dead
in the village streets, carried him beyond all thought of prudence. A troop of horse volunteered
to follow him; and few as they were, he pushed at once with them for the bridge. The morning
was now far gone; and Rupert had reached Chalgrove Field, a broad space without enclosures,
where he had left his foot drawn up amidst the standing corn to secure his retreat. To Hampden
the spot was a memorable one; it was there, if we trust a Royalist legend, that "he first mustered
and drew up men in arms to rebel against the king." But he had little time for memories such
as these. His resolve was to hold Rupert by charge after charge till Essex could come up; and
the arrival of these troops of horse with some dragoons enabled him to attack. The attack was
roughly beaten off, and the assailants thrown into confusion, but Hampden rallied the broken
troops and again led them on. Again they were routed, and Rupert drew off across the river
without further contest. It was indeed only the courage of Hampden that had fired his little
troop to face the Cavaliers; and he could fire them no more. In the last charge a shot struck
him in the shoulder and disabled his sword-arm. His head bending down, his hands resting on
his horse's neck, he rode off the field before the action was done, "a thing he never used
to do." The story of the country-side told how the wounded man rode first towards Pyrton. It
was the village where he had wedded the wife he loved so well, and beyond it among the beech-trees
of the Chilterns lay his own house of Hampden. But it was not there that he was to die. A party
of Royalists drove him back from Pyrton, and turning northwards he paused for a moment at a
little brook that crossed his path, then gathering strength leaped it, and rode almost fainting
to Thame. At first the surgeons gave hopes of his recovery, but hope was soon over. For six
days he lay in growing agony, sending counsel after counsel to the Parliament, till on the
twenty-fourth of June the end drew near. "O Lord, save my country," so ended Hampden's prayers;
"O Lord, be merciful to----!" here his speech failed him, and he fell back lifeless on his
bed. With arms reversed and muffled flags, his own men bore him through the lanes and woods
he knew so well to the little church that still stands unchanged beside his home. On the floor
of its chancel the brasses of his father and his grandfather mark their graves. A step nearer
to the altar, unmarked by brass or epitaph, lies the grave in which, with bitter tears and
cries, his greencoats laid the body of the leader whom they loved. "Never were heard such piteous
cries at the death of one man as at Master Hampden's." With him indeed all seemed lost. But
bitter as were their tears, a noble faith lifted these Puritans out of despair. As they bore
him to his grave they sang, in the words of the ninetieth psalm, how fleeting in the sight
of the Divine Eternity is the life of man.

[Sidenote: Relief of Gloucester.]

To Royalists as to Parliamentarians the death of Hampden seemed an omen of ruin to the cause
he loved. Disaster followed disaster: Essex, more and more anxious for a peace, fell back on
Uxbridge; while a cowardly surrender of Bristol to Prince Rupert gave Charles the second city
of the kingdom, and the mastery of the West. The news of the loss of Bristol fell on the Parliament
"like a sentence of death." The Lords debated nothing but proposals of peace. London itself
was divided. "A great multitude of the wives of substantial citizens" clamoured at the door
of the Commons for peace; and a flight of six of the few peers who remained at Westminster
to the camp at Oxford proved the general despair of the Parliament's success. From this moment
however the firmness of the Parliamentary leaders began slowly to reverse the fortunes of the
war. If Hampden was gone, Pym remained; and while weaker men despaired Pym was toiling night
and day to organize a future victory. The spirit of the Commons was worthy of their great leader:
and Waller was received on his return from Roundway Hill "as if he had brought the king prisoner
with him." The Committee of Public Safety were lavish of men and money. Essex was again reinforced.
The new army of the associated counties, which had been placed under the command of Lord Manchester,
was ordered to check the progress of Newcastle in the North. But it was in the West that the
danger was greatest. Prince Maurice continued his brother Rupert's career of success, and his
conquest of Barnstaple and Exeter secured Devon for the king. Gloucester alone interrupted
the communications between the royal forces in Bristol and those in the North; and at the opening
of August Charles moved against the city with hope of a speedy surrender. But the gallant resistance
of the town called Essex to its relief. It was reduced to a single barrel of powder when the
Earl's approach forced Charles to raise the siege on the sixth of September; and the Puritan
army fell steadily back again on London after an indecisive engagement near Newbury, in which
Lord Falkland fell, "ingeminating 'Peace, peace!'" and the London train-bands flung Rupert's
horsemen roughly off their front of pikes.

[Sidenote: League with Scotland.]

The relief of Gloucester proved to be the turning-point of the war. It was not merely that
Charles had met with a repulse; it was that he had missed a victory, and that in the actual
posture of affairs nothing but a great victory could have saved the king. For the day which
witnessed the triumphant return of Essex witnessed the solemn taking of the Covenant. Pym had
resolved at last to fling the Scotch sword into the wavering balance; and in the darkest hour
of the Parliament's cause Sir Harry Vane had been despatched to Edinburgh to arrange the terms
on which the aid of Scotland would be given. First amongst these terms stood the demand of
a "unity in Religion"; an adoption, in other words, of the Presbyterian system by the Church
of England. To such a change Pym had been steadily opposed. He had even withstood Hampden when,
after the passing of the bill for the expulsion of bishops from the House of Peers, Hampden
had pressed for the abolition of episcopacy. But events had moved so rapidly since the earlier
debates on Church government that some arrangement of this kind had become a necessity. The
bishops to a man, and the bulk of the clergy whose bent was purely episcopal, had joined the
royal cause, and were being expelled from their livings as "delinquents." Some new system of
Church government was imperatively called for by the religious necessities of the country;
and though Pym and the leading statesmen were still in opinion moderate Episcopalians, the
growing force of Presbyterianism, and still more the absolute need of Scottish aid and the
needs of the war, forced them to seek such a system in the adoption of the Scotch discipline.

[Sidenote: England swears to the Covenant.]

Scotland, for its part, saw that the triumph of the Parliament was necessary for its own security.
Whatever difficulties stood in the way of Vane's wary and rapid negotiations were removed in
fact by the policy of the king. While the Parliament looked for aid to the North, Charles had
been seeking assistance from the Irish rebels. Wild tales of the supposed massacre had left
them the objects of a vengeful hate unknown before in England, but with the king they were
simply counters in his game of kingcraft. Their rising had now grown into an organized rebellion.
In October 1642 an Assembly of the Confederate Catholics gathered at Kilkenny. Eleven Catholic
bishops, fourteen peers, and two hundred and twenty-six commoners, of English and Irish blood
alike, formed this body, which assumed every prerogative of sovereignty, communicated with
foreign powers, and raised an army to vindicate Irish independence. In spite of this Charles
had throughout the year been intriguing with the confederates through Lord Glamorgan; and though
his efforts to secure their direct aid were for some time fruitless he succeeded in September
in bringing about an armistice between their forces and the army under the Earl of Ormond which
had as yet held them in check. The truce left this army at the king's disposal for service
in England; while it secured him as the price of this armistice a pledge from the Catholics
that they would support his cause. With their aid Charles thought himself strong enough to
strike a blow at the Government in Edinburgh; and the Irish Catholics promised to support by
their landing in Argyleshire a rising of the Highlanders under Montrose. None of the king's
schemes proved so fatal to his cause as these. On their discovery officer after officer in
his own army flung down their commissions, the peers who had fled to Oxford fled back again
to London, and the Royalist reaction in the Parliament itself came utterly to an end. Scotland,
anxious for its own safety, hastened to sign the Covenant; and on the twenty-fifth of September
1643 the Commons, "with uplifted hands," swore in St. Margaret's church to observe it. The
Covenant ended with a solemn acknowledgement of national sin, and a vow of reformation.

[Sidenote: Pym's plan for 1644.]

The conclusion of the Covenant had been the last work of Pym. He died on December 6, 1643,
and a "Committee of the Two Kingdoms" which was entrusted after his death with the conduct
of the war and of foreign affairs did their best to carry out the plans he had formed for the
coming year. The vast scope of these plans bears witness to his amazing ability. Three strong
armies, comprising a force of fifty thousand men, appeared in the field in the spring of 1644,
ready to co-operate with the Scots in the coming campaign. The presence of the Scottish army
indeed changed the whole face of the war. With Lord Leven at its head, it crossed the Border
in January "in a great frost and snow"; and Newcastle, who was hoping to be reinforced by detachments
from Ormond's army, was forced to hurry northward single-handed to arrest its march. He succeeded
in checking Leven at Sunderland, but his departure freed the hands of Fairfax, who in spite
of defeat still clung to the West-Riding. With the activity of a true soldier, Fairfax threw
himself on the forces from Ormond's army who had landed at Chester, and after cutting them
to pieces at Nantwich on the twenty-fifth of January, marched as rapidly back upon York. Here
he was joined by the army of the Associated Counties, a force of fourteen thousand men under
the command of Lord Manchester, but in which Cromwell's name was becoming famous as a leader.
The two armies at once drove the force left behind by Newcastle to take shelter within the
walls of York, and formed the siege of that city. The danger of York called Newcastle back
to its relief; but he was too weak to effect it, and the only issue of his return was the junction
of the Scots with its besiegers. The plans of Pym were now rapidly developed. While Manchester
and Fairfax united with Lord Leven under the walls of York, Waller, who with the army of the
West had held Prince Maurice in check in Dorsetshire, marched quickly to a junction with Essex,
whose army had been watching Charles; and the two forces formed a blockade of Oxford.

[Sidenote: Marston Moor.]

Charles was thrown suddenly on the defensive. The Irish troops, on which he counted as a balance
to the Scots, had been cut to pieces by Fairfax or by Waller, and both in the North and in
the South he seemed utterly overmatched. But he was far from despairing. Before the advance
of Essex he had answered Newcastle's cry for aid by despatching Prince Rupert from Oxford to
gather forces on the Welsh border; and the brilliant partizan, after breaking the sieges of
Newark and Lathom House, burst over the Lancashire hills into Yorkshire, slipped by the Parliamentary
army, and made his way untouched into York. But the success of this feat of arms tempted him
to a fresh act of daring. He resolved on a decisive battle; and on the second of July 1644
a discharge of musketry from the two armies as they faced each other on Marston Moor brought
on, as evening gathered, a disorderly engagement. On the one flank a charge of the king's horse
broke that of the Scotch; on the other, Cromwell's brigade won as complete a success over Rupert's
troopers. "God made them as stubble to our swords," wrote the general at the close of the day;
but in the heat of victory he called back his men from the chase to back Manchester in his
attack on the Royalist foot, and to rout their other wing of horse as it returned breathless
from pursuing the Scots. Nowhere had the fighting been so fierce. A young Puritan who lay dying
on the field told Cromwell as he bent over him that one thing lay on his spirit. "I asked him
what it was," Cromwell wrote afterwards. "He told me it was that God had not suffered him to
be any more the executioner of His enemies."

[Sidenote: Newbury.]

At nightfall all was over; and the Royalist cause in the North had perished at a blow. Newcastle
fled over sea: York surrendered, and Rupert, with hardly a man at his back, rode southward
to Oxford. The blow was the more terrible that it fell on Charles at a moment when his danger
in the South was being changed into triumph by a series of brilliant and unexpected successes.
After a month's siege the king had escaped from Oxford; had waited till Essex, vexed at having
missed his prey, had marched to attack what he looked on as the main Royalist force, that under
Maurice in the West; and then, turning fiercely on Waller at Cropredy Bridge, had driven him
back broken to London, two days before the battle of Marston Moor. Charles followed up his
success by hurrying in the track of Essex, whom he hoped to crush between his own force and
that under Maurice; and when, by a fatal error, Essex plunged into Cornwall, where the country
was hostile, the king hemmed him in among the hills, and drew his lines tightly round his army.
On the second of September the whole body of the foot were forced to surrender at his mercy,
while the horse cut their way through the besiegers, and Essex himself fled by sea to London.
Nor was this the only reverse of fortune which brought hope to the royal cause. The day on
which the army of Essex surrendered to the king was marked by a Royalist triumph in Scotland
which promised to undo what Marston Moor had done. The Irish Catholics fulfilled their covenant
with Charles by the landing of Irish soldiers in Argyle; and as had long since been arranged,
Montrose, throwing himself into the Highlands, called the clans to arms. Flinging his new force
on that of the Covenanters at Tippermuir, he gained a victory which enabled him to occupy Perth,
to sack Aberdeen, and to spread terror to Edinburgh. The news at once told. The Scottish army
in England refused to march further from its own country; and used the siege of Newcastle as
a pretext to remain near the Border. With the army of Essex annihilated and the Scots at a
safe distance, no obstacle seemed to lie between the king and London; and as he came up from
the West Charles again marched on the capital. But if the Scots were detained at Newcastle
the rest of the victors at Marston Moor lay in his path at Newbury; and their force was strengthened
by the soldiers who had surrendered in Cornwall, but whom the energy of the Parliament had
again brought into the field. On the twenty-seventh of October Charles fell on this army under
Lord Manchester's command; but the charges of the Royalists failed to break the Parliamentary
squadrons, and the soldiers of Essex wiped away the shame of their defeat by flinging themselves
on the cannon they had lost, and bringing them back in triumph to their lines. Cromwell seized
the moment of victory, and begged hard to be suffered to charge with his single brigade. But
Manchester shrank like Essex from a crowning victory over the king. Charles was allowed to
withdraw his army to Oxford, and even to reappear unchecked in the field of his defeat.

[Sidenote: Cromwell.]

The quarrel of Cromwell with Lord Manchester at Newbury was destined to give a new colour to
the war. Pym, in fact, had hardly been borne to his grave in Westminster Abbey before England
instinctively recognized a successor of yet greater genius in the victor of Marston Moor. Born
in the closing years of Elizabeth's reign, the child of a cadet of the great house of the Cromwells
of Hinchinbrook, and of kin, through their marriages, with Hampden and St. John, Oliver had
been recalled by his father's death from a short stay at Cambridge to the little family estate
at Huntingdon, which he quitted for a farm at St. Ives. We have seen his mood during the years
of personal rule, as he dwelt in "prolonging" and "blackness" amidst fancies of coming death,
the melancholy which formed the ground of his nature feeding itself on the inaction of the
time. But his energy made itself felt the moment the tyranny was over. His father had sat,
with three of his uncles, in the later Parliaments of Elizabeth. Oliver had himself been returned
to that of 1628, and the town of Cambridge sent him as its representative to the Short Parliament
as to the Long. It is in the latter that a courtier, Sir Philip Warwick, gives us our first
glimpse of his actual appearance. His hat was without a hat-band. His stature was of a good
size; his sword stuck close to his side; his countenance swoln and reddish; his voice sharp
and untuneable, and his eloquence full of fervour."

[Sidenote: The Ironsides.]

He was already "much hearkened unto," but his power was to assert itself in deeds rather than
in words. He appeared at the head of a troop of his own raising at Edgehill; but with the eye
of a born soldier he at once saw the blot in the army of Essex. "A set of poor tapsters and
town apprentices," he warned Hampden, "would never fight against men of honour"; and he pointed
to religious enthusiasm as the one weapon which could meet and turn the chivalry of the Cavalier.
Even to Hampden the plan seemed impracticable; but the regiment of a thousand men which Cromwell
raised for the Association of the Eastern Counties, and which in later times were known as
his Ironsides, was formed strictly of "men of religion." He spent his fortune freely on the
task he set himself. "The business . . . hath had of me in money between eleven and twelve
hundred pounds, therefore my private estate can do little to help the public. . . . I have
little money of my own (left) to help my soldiers." But they were "a lovely company," he tells
his friends with soldierly pride. No blasphemy, drinking, disorder, or impiety were suffered
in their ranks. "Not a man swears but he pays his twelve pence." Nor was his choice of "men
of religion" the only innovation Cromwell introduced into his new regiment. The social traditions
which restricted command to men of birth were disregarded. "It may be," he wrote, in answer
to complaints from the Committee of the Association, "it provokes your spirit to see such plain
men made captains of horse. It had been well that men of honour and birth had entered into
their employments; but why do they not appear? But seeing it is necessary the work must go
on, better plain men than none: but best to have men patient of wants, faithful and conscientious
in their employment, and such, I hope, these will approve themselves." The words paint Cromwell's
temper accurately enough; he is far more of the practical soldier than of the reformer; though
his genius already breaks in upon his aristocratic and conservative sympathies, and catches
glimpses of the social revolution to which the war was drifting. "I had rather," he once burst
out impatiently, "have a plain russet-coated captain, that knows what he fights for and loves
what he knows, than what you call a gentleman, and is nothing else. I honour a gentleman that
is so indeed!" he ends, with a return to his more common mood of feeling, but the outburst
was none the less a characteristic one.

[Sidenote: The Independents.]

The same practical temper broke out in a more startling innovation. Against dissidents from
the legal worship of the Church the Presbyterians were as bitter as Laud himself. But Nonconformity
was rising into proportions which made its claim of toleration, of the freedom of religious
worship, one of the problems of the time. Its rise had been a sudden one. The sects who rejected
in Elizabeth's day the conception of a National Church, and insisted on the right of each congregation
to freedom of worship, had all but disappeared at the close of the queen's reign. Some of the
dissidents, as in the notable instance of the congregation that produced the Pilgrim Fathers,
had found a refuge in Holland; but the bulk had been driven by persecution to a fresh conformity
with the Established Church. As soon however as Abbot's primacy promised a milder rule, the
Separatist refugees began to venture timidly back again to England. During their exile in Holland
the main body had contented themselves with the free developement of their system of independent
congregations, each forming in itself a complete Church, and to these the name of Independents
attached itself at a later time. A small part however had drifted into a more marked severance
in doctrine from the Established Church, especially in their belief of the necessity of adult
baptism, a belief from which their obscure congregation at Leyden became known as that of the
Baptists. Both of these sects gathered a Church in London in the middle of James's reign, but
the persecuting zeal of Laud prevented any spread of their opinions under that of his successor;
and it was not till their numbers were suddenly increased by the return of a host of emigrants
from New England, with Hugh Peters at their head, on the opening of the Long Parliament, that
the Congregational or Independent body began to attract attention.

[Sidenote: The Parliament and Uniformity.]

Lilburne and Burton declared themselves adherents of what was called "the New England way";
and a year later saw in London alone the rise of "fourscore congregations of several sectaries,"
as Bishop Hall scornfully tells us, "instructed by guides fit for them, cobblers, tailors,
felt-makers, and such-like trash." But little religious weight however could be attributed
as yet to the Congregational movement. Baxter at this time had not heard of the existence of
any Independents. Milton in his earlier pamphlets shows no sign of their influence. Of the
hundred and five ministers present in the Westminster Assembly only five were Congregational
in sympathy, and these were all returned refugees from Holland. Among the one hundred and twenty
London ministers in 1643, but three were suspected of leaning towards the Sectaries. The struggle
with Charles in fact at its outset only threw new difficulties in the way of religious freedom.
The great majority of the Parliament were averse from any alterations in the constitution or
doctrine of the Church itself; and it was only the refusal of the bishops to accept any diminution
of their power and revenues, the growth of a party hostile to Episcopalian government, the
necessity for purchasing the aid of the Scots by a union in religion as in politics, and above
all the urgent need of constructing some new ecclesiastical organization in the place of the
older organization which had become impossible from the political attitude of the bishops,
that forced on the two Houses the adoption of the Covenant. But the change to a Presbyterian
system of Church government seemed at that time of little import to the bulk of Englishmen.
The dogma of the necessity of bishops was held by few; and the change was generally regarded
with approval as one which brought the Church of England nearer to that of Scotland, and to
the reformed Churches of the Continent. But whatever might be the change in its administration,
no one imagined that it had ceased to be the Church of England, or that it had parted with
its right to exact conformity to its worship from the nation at large. The Tudor theory of
its relation to the State, of its right to embrace all Englishmen within its pale, and to dictate
what should be their faith and form of worship, remained utterly unquestioned by any man of
note. The sentiments on which such a theory rested indeed for its main support, the power of
historical tradition, the association of "dissidence" with danger to the State, the strong
English instinct of order, the as strong English dislike of "innovations," with the abhorrence
of "indifferency" as a sign of lukewarmness in matters of religion, had only been intensified
by the earlier incidents of the struggle with the king.

[Sidenote: Growth of dissidence.]

The Parliament therefore was steadily pressing on the new system of ecclesiastical government
in the midst of the troubles of the war. An Assembly of Divines, which was called together
in 1643 at Westminster, and which sat in the Jerusalem Chamber during the five years which
followed, was directed to revise the Articles, to draw up a Confession of Faith, and a Directory
of Public Worship; and these with a scheme of Church government, a scheme only distinguished
from that of Scotland by the significant addition of a lay court of superior appeal set by
Parliament over the whole system of Church courts and assemblies, were accepted by the Houses
and embodied in a series of Ordinances. But while the Divines were drawing up their platform
of uniform belief and worship, dissidence was growing fast into a religious power. In the terrible
agony of the struggle against Charles individual conviction became a stronger force than religious
tradition. Theological speculation took an unprecedented boldness from the temper of the times.
The shock of war had broken the bonds of custom, and given a violent impulse to the freest
thought. The poet himself had drifted from his Presbyterian standpoint and saw that "new Presbyter
is but old Priest writ large." The same change was going on widely about him. Four years after
the war had begun a horror-stricken pamphleteer numbered sixteen religious sects as existing
in defiance of the law; and, widely as these bodies differed among themselves, all were at
one in repudiating any right of control in faith or in worship on the part of the Church or
its clergy. Above all, the class which became specially infected with the spirit of religious
freedom was the class to whose zeal and vigour the Parliament was forced to look for success
in the struggle. Cromwell had wisely sought for good fighting men among the "godly" farmers
of the Associated Counties. But where he found such men he found dissidents, men who were resolved
to seek God after their own fashion, and who were as hostile to the despotism of the National
Church as to the despotism of the king.

[Sidenote: Cromwell and the dissidents.]

The problem was a new and a difficult one; but Cromwell met it in the same practical temper
which showed itself in his dealings with the social difficulties that stood in the way of military
organization. The sentiments of these farmers were not his own. Bitter as had been his hatred
of the bishops, and strenuously as he had worked to bring about a change in Church government,
Cromwell, like most of the Parliamentary leaders, seems to have been content with the new Presbyterianism,
and the Presbyterians were more than content with him. Lord Manchester "suffered him to guide
the army at his pleasure." "The man, Cromwell," writes the Scotchman Baillie, "is a very wise
and active head, universally well beloved as religious and stout." But they were startled and
alarmed by his dealings with these dissident recruits. He met the problem in his unspeculative
fashion. He wanted good soldiers and good men; and, if they were these, the Independent, the
Baptist, the Leveller found entry among his troops. "You would respect them, did you see them,"
he answered the panic-stricken Presbyterians who charged them with "Anabaptistry" and revolutionary
aims: "they are no Anabaptists: they are honest, sober Christians; they expect to be used as
men." But he was busier with his new regiment than with theories of Church and State; and his
horsemen were no sooner in action than they proved themselves such soldiers as the war had
never seen yet. "Truly they were never beaten at all," their leader said proudly at its close.
At Winceby fight they charged "singing psalms," cleared Lincolnshire of the Cavaliers, and
freed the eastern counties from all danger from Newcastle's partizans. At Marston Moor they
faced and routed Rupert's chivalry. At Newbury it was only Manchester's reluctance that hindered
them from completing the ruin of Charles.

[Sidenote: Self-denying Ordinance.]

Cromwell had shown his capacity for organization in the creation of the Ironsides; his military
genius had displayed itself at Marston Moor. Newbury raised him into a political leader. "Without
a more speedy, vigorous, and effective prosecution of the war," he said to the Commons after
his quarrel with Manchester, "casting off all lingering proceedings, like those of soldiers
of fortune beyond sea to spin out a war, we shall make the kingdom weary of us, and hate the
name of a Parliament." But under the leaders who at present conducted it a vigorous conduct
of the war was hopeless. They were, in Cromwell's plain words, "afraid to conquer." They desired
not to crush Charles, but to force him back, with as much of his old strength remaining as
might be, to the position of a constitutional king. The old loyalty, too, clogged their enterprise;
they shrank from the taint of treason. "If the king be beaten," Manchester urged at Newbury,
"he will still be king; if he beat us he will hang us all for traitors." To a mood like this
Cromwell's reply seemed horrible: "If I met the king in battle I would fire my pistol at the
king as at another." The army, too, as he long ago urged at Edgehill, was not an army to conquer
with. Now, as then, he urged that till the whole force was new modelled, and placed under a
stricter discipline, "they must not expect any notable success in anything they went about."
But the first step in such a reorganization must be a change of officers. The army was led
and officered by members of the two Houses, and the Self-denying Ordinance, which was introduced
by Cromwell and Vane, declared the tenure of military or civil offices incompatible with a
seat in either.

[Sidenote: The New Model.]

The long and bitter resistance which this measure met in either House was justified at a later
time by the political results that followed the rupture of the tie which had hitherto bound
the Army to the Parliament. But the drift of public opinion was too strong to be withstood.
The country was weary of the mismanagement of the war, and demanded that military necessities
should be no longer set aside on political grounds. The Ordinance passed the Houses on the
third of April 1645, and its passage brought about the retirement of Essex, Manchester, and
Waller. The new organization of the army went rapidly on through the spring under a new commander-in-chief,
Sir Thomas Fairfax, the hero of the long contest in Yorkshire, and who had been raised into
fame by his victory at Nantwich and his bravery at Marston Moor. But behind Fairfax stood Cromwell;
and the principles on which Cromwell had formed his brigade were carried out on a larger scale
in the "New Model." The one aim was to get together twenty thousand "honest" men. "Be careful,"
Cromwell wrote, "what captains of horse you choose, what men be mounted. A few honest men are
better than numbers. If you choose godly honest men to be captains of horse, honest men will
follow them." The result was a curious medley of men of different ranks among the officers
of the New Model. The bulk of those in high command remained men of noble or gentle blood,
Montagues, Pickerings, Fortescues, Sheffields, Sidneys, and the like. But side by side with
these, though in far smaller proportion, were seen officers like Ewer, who had been a serving-man,
like Okey, who had been a drayman, or Rainsborough, who had been a "skipper at sea." A result
hardly less notable was the youth of the officers. Amongst those in high command there were
few who, like Cromwell, had passed middle age. Fairfax was but thirty-three years old, and
most of his colonels were even younger.

[Sidenote: The Army and the dissidents.]

Equally strange was the mixture of religions in its ranks. The remonstrances of the Presbyterians
had only forced Cromwell's mind forward on the road of toleration. "The State, in choosing
men to serve it," he wrote before Marston Moor, "takes no notice of these opinions. If they
be willing faithfully to serve it, that satisfies." Marston Moor spurred him to press on the
Parliament the need of at least "tolerating" dissidents; and he succeeded in procuring the
appointment of a Committee of the Commons to find some means of effecting this. But the conservative
temper of the bulk of the Puritans was at last roused by his efforts. "We detest and abhor,"
wrote the London clergy in 1645, "the much endeavoured Toleration"; and the Corporation of
London petitioned Parliament to suppress all sects "without toleration." The Parliament itself
too remained steady on the conservative side. But the fortunes of the war told for religious
freedom. Essex and his Presbyterians only marched from defeat to defeat. Though a large proportion
of the infantry was composed of pressed recruits, the cavalry was for the most part strongly
Puritan, and in that part of the army especially, as in Cromwell's horsemen drawn from among
the farmers from the eastern counties, dissidence of every type had gained a firm foothold.

[Sidenote: Negotiations at Uxbridge.]

Of the political and religious aspect of the New Model we shall have to speak at a later time;
as yet its energy was directed solely to "the speedy and vigorous prosecution of the war."
At the very moment when Fairfax was ready for action the policy of Cromwell was aided by the
policy of the king. From the hour when Newbury marked the breach between the peace and war
parties in the Parliament, and when the last became identified with the partizans of religious
liberty, the Scotch Commissioners and the bulk of the Commons had seen that their one chance
of hindering what they looked on as revolution in Church and State lay in pressing for fresh
negotiations with Charles. These were opened at Uxbridge, and prolonged through the winter;
but the hopes of concession which the king held out were suddenly withdrawn in the spring of
1645. He saw, as he thought, the Parliamentary army dissolved and ruined by its new modelling
at an instant when news came from Scotland of fresh successes on the part of Montrose, and
of his overthrow of the troops under Argyle's command in a victory at Inverlochy. "Before the
end of the summer," wrote the conqueror, "I shall be in a position to come to your Majesty's
aid with a brave army." He pressed Charles to advance to the Scottish border, where a junction
of their armies might still suffice to crush any force the Parliament could bring against them.
The party of war at once gained the ascendant in the royal councils. The negotiations at Uxbridge
were broken off, and in May Charles opened his campaign by a march to the north.

[Sidenote: Naseby.]

At first all went well for the king. Leicester was stormed, the blockade of Chester raised,
and the eastern counties threatened, until Fairfax, who had hoped to draw Charles back again
by a blockade of Oxford, was forced to hurry on his track. Cromwell, who had been suffered
by the House to retain his command for a few days in spite of the Ordinance, joined Fairfax
as he drew near the king, and his arrival was greeted by loud shouts of welcome from the troops.
On the fourteenth of June 1645 the two armies met near Naseby, to the north-west of Northampton.
The king was eager to fight; "Never have my affairs been in as good a state," he cried; and
Prince Rupert was as impatient as his uncle. On the other side, even Cromwell doubted as a
soldier the success of his newly-drilled troops, though his religious enthusiasm swept away
doubt in the assurance of victory. "I can say this of Naseby," he wrote soon after, "that when
I saw the enemy draw up and march in gallant order towards us, and we a company of poor ignorant
men, to seek to order our battle, the general having commanded me to order all the horse, I
could not, riding alone about my business, but smile out to God in praises, in assurance of
victory, because God would by things that are not bring to nought things that are. Of which
I had great assurance, and God did it." The battle began with a furious charge of Rupert uphill,
which routed the wing opposed to him under Ireton; while the Royalist foot, after a single
discharge, clubbed their muskets and fell on the centre under Fairfax so hotly that it slowly
and stubbornly gave way. But the Ironsides were conquerors on the left. A single charge broke
the northern horse under Langdale, who had already fled before them at Marston Moor; and holding
his troops firmly in hand, Cromwell fell with them on the flank of the Royalist foot in the
very crisis of its success. A panic of the king's reserve, and its flight from the field, aided
his efforts. It was in vain that Rupert returned with forces exhausted by pursuit, that Charles
in a passion of despair called on his troopers for "one charge more." The battle was over:
artillery, baggage, even the royal papers, fell into the conqueror's hands; five thousand men
surrendered; and only two thousand followed the king in his headlong flight from the field.

[Sidenote: Close of the War.]

The war was ended at a blow. While Charles wandered helplessly along the Welsh border in search
of fresh forces, Fairfax marched rapidly on the south-west, where an organized royal force
alone existed; routed Goring's force at Langport, in Somersetshire; broke up the Royalist army;
and in three weeks was master to the Land's End. A victory at Kilsyth, which gave Scotland
for the moment to Montrose, threw a transient gleam over the darkening fortunes of his master's
cause; but the surrender of Bristol to the Parliamentary army, and the dispersion of the last
force Charles could gather from Wales in an attempt to relieve Chester, were followed in September
by news of the crushing and irretrievable defeat of the "Great Marquis" at Philiphaugh. In
the wreck of the royal cause we may pause for a moment over an incident which brings out in
relief the best temper of both sides. Cromwell, who was sweeping over the southern counties
to trample out the last trace of resistance, "spent much time with God in prayer before the
storm" of Basing House, where the Marquis of Winchester had held stoutly out through the war
for the king. The storm ended its resistance, and the brave old Royalist was brought in a prisoner
with his house flaming around him. He "broke out," reports a Puritan bystander, "and said,
'that if the king had no more ground in England but Basing House, he would adventure it as
he did, and so maintain it to the uttermost,' comforting himself in this matter 'that Basing
House was called Loyalty.'" Of loyalty such as this Charles was utterly unworthy. The seizure
of his papers at Naseby had hardly disclosed his earlier intrigues with the Irish Catholics
when the Parliament was able to reveal to England a fresh treaty with them, which purchased
no longer their neutrality, but their aid, by the simple concession of every demand they had
made. The shame was without profit, for whatever aid Ireland might have given came too late
to be of service. The spring of 1646 saw the few troops who still clung to Charles surrounded
and routed at Stow. God is a spirit. The human spirit refined, purified, sees Him in proportion to
its purification.

[Sidenote: Modern Christology.]

[Sidenote: Former Limitations.]

[Sidenote:
Ritual Statement.]

[Sidenote: Aim of Christianity.]

[Sidenote: Likeness
to God.]

In respect of "Jesus Christ, His only Son our Lord," it
may, it must, be said He remains in full and glorious vigor as the
Redeemer of mankind.

The marked difference between our time and a half-century ago with
respect to Christ is in the extension, rather than the diminution
of His relation to salvation and the extension of the idea of salvation
itself.

In the former days men's eyes were almost wholly fixed on His death
and its relation to salvation in the future life.

There is less disposition to dogmatize as to theories of the atonement. Most, I think, come
to feel that no one view contains the full significance of Christ's death. Have you noticed
how the Ritual puts it in the order of the Lord's Supper? The men who wrote that struggled to
interpret His death by every possible phase of its meaning. In our time we have come to see that
the aim of Christ and Christianity is to develop character and that this must be gained in time
that we may be ready for eternity. Thus the death of Christ as the ultimate of self-sacrifice
persuades us to the death of sin in us that we may live renewed in God; "rise from our dead selves
to higher things." His life persuades us as the condition and example of growth to move on
from the first self-surrender into the habit and fact of constant obedience and therefore "into
the likeness of God's dear Son."

The consciousness, well-nigh universal, of the nobility of self-sacrifice is that which gives
vitality and vogue among the masses to the doctrine of the atonement. Self-sacrifice becomes
more rare as wealth and refinement modify men and women. He that has much is loath to lose
or leave it. Hence the rich generally fight in security. The poor meet the bullets first.

Bad as is the conduct of some trades-unionists, it is among these toilers that great deeds of sympathy
and generosity are done. How they tax themselves to help each other! How their women work for each
other when one is unable to care for herself or her children! Their doctrine that "an injury
to one is a wrong to all" has much that is Christlike in it.

Let us who believe in an atoning Christ rejoice that as long as men
honor bravery--self-sacrifice unto death for country, home, or the
life of dear ones; as long as they build monuments to generals, soldiers,
firemen, physicians who die for others, so will the world be slow
to disbelieve the doctrine that "Jesus Christ tasted death for every
man."

[Sidenote: John's Logos.]

[Sidenote: An Anthropomorphic God.]

More, too, is made of His life before the Incarnation. The pre-existence of Christ is an essential
element in Christianity. "His eternal relation to God is the only way of conceiving Him which answers
to His real greatness."[4] The Christ was present and active in the creation. John's use of
the word "Logos" is right. "Logos" is not merely a result but a Force. It is not only the speech,
but the speaker. Let us admit once for all that the fact, much belabored of the critics, is
a fact. Let us not be afraid of the word which expresses it. God must be anthropomorphic if He
exists. We can come nowhere near to thinking out any other kind of God. Christ has the value
of God to devout Christians because in the fullness of His moral perfections He expresses God so far
as we can know Him and man so far as man can hope and grow.

[Footnote 4: Denney. Studies in Theology.]

[Sidenote: How Son of God.]

Is His Sonship different from ours, or only an expansion of the fullness and perfection of our
sonship? This last seems to me a most important question. If He was born as we were born--that is,
as to the beginning of His earthly life, there can be no pre-eminent sense in which He was the Son
of God. He was either a happy accident of natural birth or a "sport" in evolution.

[Sidenote: The Virgin Birth.]

This brings us to that doctrine which is the greatest challenge to the doubter: "Conceived by the
Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary,"--a doctrine fiercely fought by Harnack and yet by no means
to be dismissed as he dismisses it. His teaching on this point seems to me the result of his theory
of Christianity. If one seeks to rid Christianity of the supernatural, here is the place to
begin.

[Sidenote: Dignity of the Story.]

[Sidenote: A Greater Puzzle.]

But who will not feel the force of the position that, granted God was to be incarnate, the story
of Christ's incarnation is the noblest and most probable? He is not born of a man's lust nor of a
woman's desire--but of the submission of untainted womanhood to the direct creative power of God.
The alternative to this is the Divinest man in all the world born of sinning and not yet married
parents. If the new doctrine of heredity be true that men may inherit good as well as evil,
we still have an astounding fact to account for; namely, the birth of such a child from such
conditions, that is, with all the good kept in and all the bad left out.

[Sidenote: Parthenogenesis a Fact.]

When men speak of a virgin birth as incredible and impossible and as the weakest of all Christian
doctrine, do they know or have they forgotten that parthenogenesis (virgin birth) is a fact in
nature; existing, for example, in as highly organized insects as the honey bee? There are other
insects which are parthenogenetic at one time and sexually productive at another. There are also
hints of it in human life known to anatomists which can not be fully discussed here.

[Sidenote: Among the Bees.]

[Sidenote: A Small Departure from Nature.]

The virgin queen bee produces males in abundance, but can not produce females until she has
made her nuptial flight and met her mate in an embrace invariably fatal to him. Nor does she ever
need to meet another. From that time on, she is the fruitful mother of every kind of bee life
the hive needs; the undeveloped females called neuters and those who become queens by being fed
on royal food. Virgin birth is therefore imbedded in nature's order. To occur in the human
species nature need call in no novelty. Christ, if born of a virgin, was born with the smallest
possible departure from the order of nature. A process known in a lower form of life was carried
into the higher to produce the unique being called for by the spiritual
needs of mankind.

* * * * *

[Sidenote: The Historical Statement.]

Passing over the historical assertions which follow the doctrine of the virgin birth, "suffered
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried," because there is nothing in these statements
difficult or incredible, we reach the doctrine of His resurrection, "the third day He rose from the
dead," a doctrine next to that of the virgin birth in natural difficulty of acceptance.

[Sidenote: Christ's Resurrection.]

[Sidenote: Surprise of Disciples.]

[Sidenote: The Fact Accounts for History.]

Faith in this seems to me to depend on how far we have accepted Christ's Deity and His incarnation.
If by the Holy Ghost we have been able "to say that Jesus is the
Lord;" if by that blessed energy we perceive His Divine mastership;
if by the same energy we feel that He has transformed us into the
image of His dear Son; raising us "from the death of sin into the
life of righteousness" it is not difficult to believe that Jesus "the
power of the Resurrection" rose from the dead.

"The fact of the Resurrection and belief in the fact is not explicable
by any antecedent conditions apart from its truth."[5] The disciples
did not expect what they saw.

His death was for them so far as we can see, without hope. They were not able yet to interpret His
prophecy that He would build again His temple, nor understand the spirituality of His kingdom.
These facts seem to me utterly to demolish the theory of a vision called up by eager, yea, agonizing,
expectation. The idea of the Resurrection justifies His prophecies as to Himself and the fact accounts,
better than any theory which denies the fact, for the faith and founding of the early Church as
well as for the course of subsequent history and of the believer's experience.

[Footnote 5: Westcott. The Revelation of the Risen Lord.]

* * * * *

[Sidenote: Slow Belief in Resurrection.]

It is much to see that belief became belief only with great difficulty. The idea of the Resurrection
was strange and alarming to the disciples. "They were terrified and affrighted and supposed
they beheld a spirit." Slowly by tests of sense as well as by persuasions of teaching did the disciples
come to believe that the Christ of the Resurrection was the same Christ who suffered on the
cross.

[Sidenote: Not an Invention.]

[Sidenote: An Eye-witness Story.]

It seems impossible that the Resurrection could have been an invention or that the account of
it could be a work of the imagination. The last is almost as great a miracle as the Resurrection
itself. In detail, in naturalness, even in the presence of difficulties and hindrances to easy
belief of the story, the narrative seems that of an eye-witness. No reasoning can bring faith,
however, to one who denies the miraculous. As a fact, the Resurrection is incapable of naturalistic
explanation.

To those who deny the miraculous I can only again point out how Huxley
cuts out the a priori argument from Hume as worthless.

The assumption is illegitimate because it involves the whole point in dispute."

* * * * *

[Sidenote: Ascent into Heaven.]

[Sidenote: The Ascension.]

[Sidenote: Nature not Wholly Love.]

[Sidenote: Evil and Good.]

Necessarily miraculous also is the doctrine, "He ascended into heaven." In this He passed from the
visible into the invisible; from the conditions of human life to those of the life of a spirit;
from the work of redemption to that of intercession. If His resurrection be accepted, His ascension
presents no difficulties to faith. This, with His incarnation, and the facts of His earthly life are
the manifestation of the tender side of God to the senses even as His wisdom and power are shown to
the senses by the facts and laws of nature. As to the doctrine, "God is love," nature's word
can never be conclusive. In the natural kingdom joy and sorrow, ease and pain, love and hate,
kindness and cruelty, trust and terror exist side by side, as do life and death. No man concludes,
from nature alone, that God is ruled by love. Because man can not conclude this, Ormuzd and
Ahriman are found substantially in all religions, as in that of the Parsees, except in the Christian.
Here the warfare is not to be eternal. The victory of good is to come. Divine help is promised,
that it may be secured in every soul. The conquest of evil by good is within that Christian
omnipotence which Paul knew. "I can do all things through Christ who strengtheneth me." It
requires a Christ to show that the path to rest is through toil; that the way to ease is through
suffering; that the highway to life passes through death. Only thus can "mortality be swallowed
up of life."

[Sidenote: The Meaning of Jesus.]

[Sidenote: Christ as Revealer.]

In the unity of the Godhead, Christ is God in manifestation, redemption,
intercession, judgment. In the Trinity, in which we must believe God
exists, Jesus Christ is the personality expressive, at first visibly
and now invisibly, of the tender qualities of the Divine nature which,
manifested in part in the world of nature, are there so linked with
severity as to require special and peculiar revelation in the person
of Jesus Christ in order that God may be understood both as transcending
nature and as eternal love.

* * * * *

Surely the doctrine, "I believe
in the Holy Ghost," will remain. It is a misfortune that the word
"ghost" has, in our English use, an unworthy and terrifying significance.
On this account it were well if we could substitute for constant use
the word "Spirit."

[Sidenote: The Holy Ghost.]

[Sidenote: The Energy
of God.]

[Sidenote: The Interpreter.]

The Holy Spirit is the energy
of God, whether working as Creator or in the processes of redemption.
It stirs us to the depths when we consider that the Author of the
worlds, the Source of the energies is He who transforms, renews, sanctifies,
and witnesses in us. There is no question as to the pervasiveness
and competence of the Power which "works in us to will and to do of
His good pleasure." We are taught to trace all our religious uplift
to the highest possible source. We gather a great sense of our worth
by the dignity of this association as we do of the condescension of
our Lord in making His home in our hearts. This Holy Spirit is in
all Christians the energy of the entire spiritual life. By this we
do the things which by nature we can not do. His is that Divine impulse
which initiates, continues, matures, and satisfies the life of God
in us. It is the indwelling, all-pervading Holy Spirit, which interprets
that great word, "I in them and Thou in Me, that they may be one as
We are."

[Sidenote: The Doctrine of Energy.]

And if the most advanced
philosophy should yet be confirmed as true that there is nothing really
but energy, none the less would the doctrine of the Holy Spirit abide.
Back of all the individual energies of humanity; back of all the forces
of nature is the supreme energy of God. If creation be our theory,
it is the Spirit of God which broods on the face of the waters. If
evolution be our creed, it is "in Him we live and move and have our
being." All science is but the knowing of His way of working, and
all theology is but the discovery of His mind. To know Him is to know
all things. The latest Christian will be saying, "I believe in the
Holy Ghost."

* * * * *

[Sidenote: The Forgiveness of Sin.]

[Sidenote:
Huxley on Depravity.]

[Sidenote: Not All Born Good.]

[Sidenote:
Experience of Hell.]

And what becomes of the doctrine of the "forgiveness
of sins" in this outlook for "the things which remain?" Accepting
Huxley as the incarnation of the skeptical spirit of our time, I quote
from him his thought of sin, depravity, and punishment, as a hint
of where the scientific spirit may yet aid us. "I suppose that all
men with a clear sense of right and wrong have descended into hell
and stopped there quite long enough to know what infinite punishment
means."

[Sidenote: Transmission of Evil.]

Surely, the established
truths of heredity confirm the doctrine that man, if not born depraved,
is born deprived of tendencies toward good essential to his own welfare
and that of the race. "Where sin has once taken hold of the race,
the natural reproduction of life become reproduction of life morally
injured and faulty. With evil once begun, the race is a succession
of tainted individuals; an organism that works toward continuance
of evil. Not but that good is transmitted at the same time, for it
goes along with evil. Any virtue or value which is strong enough to
live will pass from generation to generation even while evil is making
the same journey."[6]

[Footnote 6: Outline of Christian Theology.
Clarke, p. 242.]

[Sidenote: Depravation and Deprivation.]

[Sidenote:
Natural Standards.]

[Sidenote: The Decalogue.]

While we hold that
this tendency, this natural sluggishness in laying hold of the things
of the higher nature is not in itself guilt, it becomes so by the
voluntary adoption of the lower forces as the guide of life. Nature
has her own decalogue. There is a law written upon our hearts.

[Sidenote: The Army negotiates with the King.]

Though Fairfax and Cromwell had been forced from their position as mediators into a hearty
co-operation with the army, its political direction rested at this moment with Cromwell's son-in-law,
Henry Ireton, and Ireton looked for a real settlement, not to the Parliament, but to the king.
"There must be some difference," he urged bluntly, "between conquerors and conquered"; but
the terms which he laid before Charles were terms of studied moderation. The vindictive spirit
which the Parliament had shown against the Royalists and the Church disappeared in the terms
exacted by the New Model; and the Army contented itself with the banishment of seven leading
"delinquents," a general Act of Oblivion for the rest, the withdrawal of all coercive power
from the clergy, the control of Parliament over the military and naval forces for ten years,
and its nomination of the great officers of State. Behind these demands however came a masterly
and comprehensive plan of political reform which had already been sketched by the army in the
"Humble Representation," with which it had begun its march on London. Belief and worship were
to be free to all. Acts enforcing the use of the Prayer-Book, or attendance at Church, or the
enforcement of the Covenant were to be repealed. Even Catholics, whatever other restraints
might be imposed, were to be freed from the bondage of compulsory worship. Parliaments were
to be triennial, and the House of Commons to be reformed by a fairer distribution of seats
and of electoral rights; taxation was to be readjusted; legal procedure simplified; a crowd
of political, commercial, and judicial privileges abolished. Ireton believed that Charles could
be "so managed" (says Mrs. Hutchinson) "as to comply with the public good of his people after
he could no longer uphold his violent will." But Charles was equally dead to the moderation
and to the wisdom of this great Act of Settlement. He saw in the crisis nothing but an opportunity
of balancing one party against another; and believed that the Army had more need of his aid
than he of the Army's. "You cannot do without me--you are lost if I do not support you," he
said to Ireton as he pressed his proposals. "You have an intention to be the arbitrator between
us and the Parliament," Ireton quietly replied, "and we mean to be so between the Parliament
and your Majesty."

[Sidenote: Flight of the king.]

But the king's tone was soon explained. If London had been panic-stricken at the approach of
the army, its panic soon disappeared. The great city was goaded to action by the humiliation
of the Parliament, and still more by the triumph of religious liberty which seemed to be approaching
through the negotiations of the Army with the king. A mob of Londoners broke into the House
of Commons and forced its members to recall the eleven. The bulk of Vane's party, some fourteen
peers and a hundred commoners, fled to the army; while those who remained at Westminster prepared
for an open struggle with it and invited Charles to return to London. But the news no sooner
reached the camp than the army was again on the march. "In two days," Cromwell said coolly,
"the city will be in our hands." On the sixth of August the soldiers entered London in triumph
and restored the fugitive members; the eleven were once more expelled; and the army leaders
resumed their negotiations with the king. The indignation of the soldiers at his delays and
intrigues made their task hourly more difficult: but Cromwell, who now threw his whole weight
on Ireton's side, clung to the hope of accommodation with a passionate tenacity. His mind,
conservative by tradition, and above all practical in temper, saw the political difficulties
which would follow on the abolition of Monarchy, and in spite of the king's evasions he persisted
in negotiating with him. But Cromwell stood almost alone. The Parliament refused to accept
Ireton's proposals as a basis of peace; Charles still evaded; and the army grew restless and
suspicious. There were cries for a wide reform, for the abolition of the House of Peers, for
a new House of Commons; and the Agitators called on the Council of Officers to discuss the
question of abolishing Royalty itself. Cromwell was never braver than when he faced the gathering
storm, forbade the discussion, adjourned the Council, and sent the officers to their regiments.
But the strain was too great to last long, and Charles was still resolute to "play his game."
He was in fact so far from being in earnest in his negotiation with Cromwell and Ireton that
at the moment they were risking their lives for him he was conducting another and equally delusive
negotiation with the Parliament, fomenting the discontent in London, and preparing for a fresh
Royalist rising. What he still more counted on was aid from the North. The intervention of
the Scots had ruined his cause, but their intervention might again restore it. The practical
suspension of the Covenant and the triumph of the party of religious liberty in England had
produced a violent reaction across the Tweed. Argyle and the zealous Presbyterians still clung
to the alliance between the two countries, though it disappointed their hopes; but Hamilton,
who had now become a Duke, put himself at the head of the more moderate religionists, and carried
the elections for a new Parliament. Charles at once saw the results of the Duke's success.
"The two nations," he wrote joyously, "will soon be at war." All that was needed for the success
of these schemes was his own liberty: and in November 1647, in the midst of their hopes of
an accommodation, the army leaders learned that they had been duped throughout, and that the
king had fled.

[Sidenote: The second Civil War.]

The flight fanned the excitement of the New Model into frenzy, and only the courage of Cromwell
averted an open mutiny in its gathering at Ware. But even Cromwell was powerless to break the
spirit which now pervaded the soldiers, and the king's perfidy left him without resources.
"The king is a man of great parts and great understanding," he said, "but so great a dissembler
and so false a man that he is not to be trusted." The danger from his escape indeed soon passed
away. By a strange error Charles had ridden from Hampton Court to the Isle of Wight, perhaps
with some hope from the sympathy of Colonel Hammond, the Governor of Carisbrook Castle, and
again found himself a prisoner. But the wider perils remained. Foiled in his effort to put
himself at the head of the new civil war, the king set himself to organize it from his prison;
and while again opening delusive negotiations with the two Houses he signed a secret treaty
with the Scots for the invasion of the realm. All that Hamilton needed to bring the new Scotch
Parliament to an active support of the king was his assent to a stipulation for the re-establishment
of Presbytery in England. This Charles at last brought himself to give in the spring of 1648,
and the Scots at once ordered an army to be levied for his support. In England the whole of
the conservative party, with many of the most conspicuous members of the Long Parliament at
its head, was drifting in its horror of the religious and political changes which seemed impending
towards the king; and at the close of May the news from Scotland gave the signal for fitful
insurrections in almost every quarter. London was only held down by main force, old officers
of the Parliament unfurled the royal flag in South Wales, and surprised Pembroke. The seizure
of Berwick and Carlisle opened a way for the Scotch invasion. Kent, Essex, and Hertford broke
out in revolt. The fleet in the Downs sent their captains on shore, hoisted the king's pennon,
and blockaded the Thames.

[Sidenote: The Houses and the Army.]

"The hour is come," cried Cromwell, "for the Parliament to save the kingdom and to govern alone."
But the Parliament showed no will to "govern alone." It looked on the rising and the intervention
of the Scots as means of freeing it from the control under which it had been writhing since
the expulsion of the eleven. It took advantage of the crisis to profess its adherence to Monarchy,
to reopen the negotiations it had broken off with the king, and to deal the fiercest blow at
religious freedom which it had ever received. The Presbyterians flocked back to their seats;
and an "Ordinance for the Suppression of Blasphemies and Heresies," which Vane and Cromwell
had long held at bay, was passed by triumphant majorities. Any man--ran this terrible statute--denying
the doctrine of the Trinity or of the Divinity of Christ, or that the books of Scripture are
"the Word of God," or the resurrection of the body, or a future day of judgement, and refusing
on trial to abjure his heresy, "shall suffer the pain of death." Any man declaring (amidst
a long list of other errors) "that man by nature hath free will to turn to God," that there
is a Purgatory, that images are lawful, that infant baptism is unlawful; any one denying the
obligation of observing the Lord's day, or asserting "that the Church government by Presbytery
is antichristian or unlawful," shall, on a refusal to renounce his errors, "be commanded to
prison." It was plain that the Presbyterians counted on the king's success to resume their
policy of conformity, and had Charles been free, or the New Model disbanded, their hopes would
probably have been realized.

[Sidenote: The Scotch Invasion.]

But Charles was still safe at Carisbrook; and the New Model was facing fiercely the danger
which surrounded it. The wanton renewal of the war at a moment when all tended to peace swept
from the mind of Fairfax and Cromwell, as from that of the army at large, every thought of
reconciliation with the king. Soldiers and generals were at last bound together again in a
stern resolve. The stern resolve was followed by vigorous action. In a few days Fairfax had
trampled down the Kentish insurgents, and had prisoned those of the eastern counties within
the walls of Colchester, while Cromwell drove the Welsh insurgents within those of Pembroke.
Both towns however held stubbornly out; and though a rising under Lord Holland in the neighbourhood
of London was easily put down, there was no force left to stem the inroad of the Scots, who
poured over the Border at the opening of July some twenty thousand strong. Luckily the surrender
of Pembroke at this critical moment set Cromwell free. Pushing rapidly northward with five
thousand men, he called in a force under Lambert which had been gallantly hanging on the Scottish
flank, and pushed over the Yorkshire hills into the valley of the Ribble, where the Duke of
Hamilton, reinforced by three thousand Royalists of the North, had advanced as far as Preston.
With an army which now numbered ten thousand men, Cromwell poured down on the flank of the
Duke's straggling line of march, attacked the Scots on the seventeenth of August as they retired
behind the Ribble, passed the river with them, cut their rearguard to pieces at Wigan, forced
the defile at Warrington, where the flying enemy made a last and desperate stand, and drove
their foot to surrender, while Lambert hunted down Hamilton and the horse. Fresh from its victory,
the New Model pushed over the Border, while the peasants of Ayrshire and the West rose in a
"Whiggamore raid" (notable as the first event in which we find the name "Whig," which is possibly
the same as our "Whey," and conveys a taunt against the "sour-milk" faces of the fanatical
Ayrshiremen), and, marching upon Edinburgh, in September, dispersed the Royalist party and
again installed Argyle in power.

[Sidenote: Demand of justice on the king.]

Argyle welcomed Cromwell as a deliverer, but the victorious general had hardly entered Edinburgh
when he was recalled by pressing news from the South. The temper with which the Parliament
had met the Royalist revolt was, as we have seen, widely different from that of the Army. It
had recalled the eleven members, and had passed the Ordinance against heresy. At the moment
of the victory at Preston the Lords were discussing charges of treason against Cromwell, while
in September commissioners were again sent to the Isle of Wight, in spite of the resistance
of the Independents, to conclude peace with the king. Royalists and Presbyterians alike pressed
Charles to grasp the easy terms which were now offered him. But if his hopes from Scotland
had utterly broken down, they had given place to hopes of a new war with the aid of an army
from Ireland; and the negotiators of the Houses saw forty days wasted in useless chicanery.
"Nothing," Charles wrote to his friends, "is changed in my designs." With Ireland and Scotland
on his side, with Royalists still in arms in the eastern counties, with the Houses at issue
with the Army, and as it seemed on the point of yielding unconditionally to the king in their
dread of organic changes, he believed that the hour of his triumph was at last at hand. But
the surrender of Colchester to Fairfax in August and Cromwell's convention with Argyle had
now set free the Army, and it at once struck fiercely at its foes. Petitions from its regiments
demanded "justice on the king." A fresh "Remonstrance" from the Council of Officers called
for the election of a new Parliament; for electoral reform; for the recognition of the supremacy
of the Houses "in all things"; for the change of kingship, should it be retained, into a magistracy
elected by the Parliament, and without veto on its proceedings.

[Sidenote: Pride's Purge.]

The demand drove the Houses to despair. That the king should be forced back into legal courses,
and if need be forced by stress of arms, seemed to the bulk of the English gentry who were
ranged on the Parliament side a necessity, though a hard necessity. But the tradition of loyalty,
of reverence for the Crown, was strong even in the men who had fought hardest against Charles.
They shrank with horror from the sight of a king at the bar of a court of justice, or yet more
on the scaffold. The demand for a new Parliament was hardly less horrible. A new Parliament
meant the rule of the Sectaries, a revolution in the whole political and religious system of
the realm. To give way to Charles altogether, to surrender all that the war had gained, seemed
better than this. Their reply to the Remonstrance was to accept the king's concessions, unimportant
as they were, as a basis of peace. The calculations of Charles were verified by the surrender
of his old opponents; but the surrender came too late to save either Parliament or king. The
step was accepted by the soldiers as a defiance. On the thirtieth of November Charles was again
seized by a troop of horse, and carried off to Hurst Castle, while a letter from Fairfax announced
the march of his army upon London. "We shall know now," said Vane, as the troops took their
post round the Houses of Parliament, "who is on the side of the king, and who on the side of
the people." But the terror of the army proved weaker among the members than the agonized loyalty
which strove to save the monarchy and the Church; and a large majority in both Houses still
voted for the acceptance of the terms which Charles had offered. The next morning, that of
the sixth of December, saw Colonel Pride at the door of the House of Commons with a list of
forty members of the majority in his hands. The Council of Officers had resolved to exclude
them, and as each member made his appearance he was arrested, and put in confinement. "By what
right do you act?" a member asked. "By the right of the sword," Hugh Peters is said to have
replied. The House was still resolute, but on the following morning forty more members were
excluded, and the rest gave way.

[Sidenote: Ruin of the Parliament.]

The sword had fallen; and the old system of English government sank helplessly beneath the
blow. The two great powers which had waged this bitter conflict, the Parliament and the Monarchy,
suddenly disappeared. The expulsion of one hundred and forty members, in a word of the majority
of the existing House, reduced the Commons to a name. The remnant who remained to co-operate
with the army were, in the coarse imagery of popular speech, but the "rump" of a Parliament.
Their will was no longer representative of the will of the country; their acts were no longer
national acts. They were simply the acts of a body of partizans who had the luck to find themselves
on the side of the sword. While the House of Commons dwindled to a sham, the House of Lords
passed away altogether. The effect of Pride's Purge was seen in a resolution of the Rump for
the trial of Charles, and the nomination on the first of January 1649 of a Court of one hundred
and fifty Commissioners to conduct it, with John Bradshaw, a lawyer of eminence, at their head.

[Sidenote: Death of the king.]

And with the ruin of the Parliament went the ruin of the Monarchy. On the twentieth of January
Charles appeared before Bradshaw's Court only to deny its competence and to refuse to plead;
but thirty-two witnesses were examined to satisfy the consciences of his judges, and it was
not till the fifth day of the trial that he was condemned to death as a tyrant, traitor, murderer,
and enemy of his country. The popular excitement vented itself in cries of "Justice," or "God
save your Majesty," as the trial went on, but all save the loud outcries of the soldiers was
hushed as, on the 30th of January 1649, Charles passed to his doom. The dignity which he had
failed to preserve in his long jangling with Bradshaw and the judges returned at the call of
death. Whatever had been the faults and follies of his life, "he nothing common did, nor mean,
upon that memorable scene." Two masked executioners awaited the king as he mounted the scaffold,
which had been erected outside one of the windows of the Banqueting House at Whitehall; the
streets and roofs were thronged with spectators; and a strong body of soldiers stood drawn
up beneath. His head fell at the first blow, and as the executioner lifted it to the sight
of all a groan of pity and horror burst from the silent crowd.

[Sidenote: Abolition of Monarchy.]

The delays and hesitation which marked the action of the Commons on the king's death showed
how stunned they were by the revolution which they were driven to bring about. To replace Charles
by a new king was impossible. His son alone would be owned as sovereign by the bulk of the
nation; and no friendship was possible between the men who now held England in their grasp
and the son of the man they had sent to the block. But it was only slowly that they bowed to
necessity. It was not till the seventeenth of March that Monarchy was formally abolished; and
two months more elapsed before the passing of that memorable Act of the nineteenth of May which
declared "that the People of England and of all the dominions and territories thereunto belonging
are, and shall be, and are hereby constituted, made, established, and confirmed, to be a Commonwealth
and Free State, and shall henceforth be governed as a Commonwealth and Free State by the supreme
authority of this nation, the representatives of the People in Parliament, and by such as they
shall appoint and constitute officers and ministers for the good of the People, and that without
any king or House of Lords."

CHAPTER XI

THE COMMONWEALTH

1649-1653

[Sidenote: Dangers of the Commonwealth.]

The news of the king's death was received throughout Europe with a thrill of horror. The Czar
of Russia chased the English envoy from his court. The ambassador of France was withdrawn on
the proclamation of the Republic. The Protestant powers of the Continent seemed more anxious
than any to disavow all connexion with a Protestant people who had brought their king to the
block. Holland took the lead in acts of open hostility to the new power as soon as the news
of the execution reached the Hague. The States-General waited solemnly on the Prince of Wales,
who took the title of Charles the Second, and recognized him as "Majesty," while they refused
an audience to the English envoys. Their Stadtholder, his brother-in-law, the Prince of Orange,
was supported by popular sympathy in the aid and encouragement he afforded to Charles; and
eleven ships of the English fleet, which had found a refuge at the Hague ever since their revolt
from the Parliament, were suffered to sail under Rupert's command, and to render the seas unsafe
for English traders. The danger however was far greater nearer home. In Scotland even the zealous
Presbyterians whom Cromwell had restored to power refused to follow England on its rejection
of monarchy. Argyle and his fellow-leaders proclaimed Charles the Second as king on the news
of his father's death; and at once despatched an embassy to the Hague to invite him to ascend
the throne. In Ireland the factions who ever since the rebellion had turned the country into
a chaos, the old Irish Catholics or native party under Owen Roe O'Neill, the Catholics of the
English Pale, the Episcopalian Royalists, the Presbyterian Royalists of the North, had at last
been brought to some sort of union by the diplomacy of Ormond; and Ormond called on Charles
to land at once in a country where he would find three-fourths of its people devoted to his cause.

[Sidenote: England and the Commonwealth.]

Of the dangers which threatened the new Commonwealth some were more apparent than real. The
rivalry of France and Spain, both anxious for its friendship, secured it from the hostility
of the greater powers of the Continent; and the ill-will of Holland could be delayed, if not
averted, by negotiations. The acceptance of the Covenant was insisted on by Scotland before
it would formally receive Charles as its ruler, and nothing but necessity would induce him
to comply with such a demand. On the side of Ireland the danger was more pressing, and an army
of twelve thousand men was set apart for a vigorous prosecution of the Irish war. But the real
difficulties were the difficulties at home. The death of Charles gave fresh vigour to the Royalist
cause; and the loyalty which it revived was stirred to enthusiasm by the publication of the
"Eikon Basilike," a work really due to the ingenuity of Dr. Gauden, a Presbyterian minister,
but which was believed to have been composed by the king himself in his later hours of captivity,
and which reflected with admirable skill the hopes, the suffering, and the piety of the royal
"martyr." For a moment there were dreams of a rising, which had to be roughly checked by the
execution of the Duke of Hamilton and Lords Holland and Capell, who had till now been confined
in the Tower. But the popular disaffection was a far more serious matter than these Royalist
intrigues. It was soon plain that the revolution which had struck down Parliament and monarchy
alike was without sanction from the nation at large. The government of the country had been
provided for by the creation of a Council of State, consisting of forty-one members selected
from what was left of the Commons, and who were entrusted with full executive power at home
and abroad. But if the Rump consented to profit by the work of the soldiers, it showed no will
to signify its approval of it. A majority of the members of the Council declined the oath offered
to them at their earliest meeting, pledging them to an approval of the king's death and the
establishment of the Commonwealth. In the nation at large the repudiation of the army's work
was universal. Half the judges retired from the bench. Thousands of refusals met the demand
of an engagement to be faithful to the Republic which was made from all beneficed clergymen
and public functionaries. It was not till May, and even then in spite of the ill-will of the
citizens, that the Council ventured to proclaim the Commonwealth in London.

[Sidenote: Designs of the Rump.]

It was plain that England had no mind to see her old parliamentary liberties set aside for
a military rule. But in truth the army itself never dreamed of establishing such a rule. Still
less did it dream of leaving the conduct of affairs in the hands of the small body of members
who still called themselves the House of Commons, a body which numbered hardly a hundred, and
whose average attendance was little more than fifty. In reducing it by "Pride's Purge" to the
mere shadow of a House the army had never contemplated its continuance as a permanent assembly:
it had, in fact, insisted as a condition of even its temporary continuance that it should prepare
a bill for the summoning of a fresh Parliament. The plan, put forward by the Council of Officers
is still interesting as the basis of many later efforts towards parliamentary reform. It advised
a dissolution in the spring, the assembling every two years of a new Parliament consisting
of four hundred members, elected by all householders rateable to the poor, and a redistribution
of seats which would have given the privilege of representation to every place of importance.
Paid military officers and civil officials were excluded from election. The plan was apparently
accepted by the Commons, and a bill based on it was again and again discussed. But it was soon
whispered about that the House had no mind to dissolve itself. Whatever might be the hopes
of the soldiers or their leaders, the shrewder statesmen who sate at Westminster knew that
the country was eager to undo the work that had been done; and that the first effort of a fairly-chosen
Parliament would be to put an end to the Commonwealth and to religious liberty. Their aim therefore
was to gain time; to continue their rule till what they looked on as a passing phase of national
feeling had disappeared, and till the great results which they looked for from their policy
both at home and abroad had reconciled the nation to the new system of government. In a witty
paraphrase of the story of Moses, Henry Marten was soon to picture the Commonwealth as a new-born
and delicate babe, and hint that "no one is so proper to bring it up as the mother who has
brought it into the world." Secret as this purpose was kept, suspicions of it no sooner stole
abroad than the popular discontent found a mouthpiece in John Lilburne, a brave, hot-headed
soldier, and the excitement of the army appeared in a formidable mutiny in May. But the leaders
of the army set all suspicion aside. "You must cut these people in pieces," Cromwell broke
out in the Council of State, "or they will cut you in pieces"; and a forced march of fifty
miles to Burford enabled him to burst with Fairfax on the mutinous regiments at midnight, and
to stamp out the revolt.

[Sidenote: Cromwell in Ireland.]

But resolute as he was against disorder, Cromwell went honestly with the army in its demand
of a new Parliament; he believed, and in his harangue to the mutineers he pledged himself to
the assertion, that the House purposed to dissolve itself. In spite of the delays thrown in
the way of the bill for a new Representative body Cromwell entertained no serious suspicion
of the Parliament's design when he was summoned to Ireland by a series of Royalist successes
which left only Dublin in the hands of the Parliamentary forces. With Scotland threatening
war, and a naval struggle impending with Holland, it was necessary that the work of the army
in Ireland should be done quickly. The temper too of Cromwell and his soldiers was one of vengeance,
for the horror of the alleged massacre remained living in every English breast, and the revolt
was looked upon as a continuance of the massacre. "We are come," he said on his landing, "to
ask an account of the innocent blood that hath been shed, and to endeavour to bring to an account
all who by appearing in arms shall justify the same." A sortie from Dublin had already broken
up Ormond's siege of the capital; and feeling himself powerless to keep the field before the
new army, the Marquis had thrown his best troops, three thousand Englishmen under Sir Arthur
Aston, as a garrison into Drogheda. Cromwell landed in Ireland on the fifteenth of August 1649;
and his storm of Drogheda in September was the first of a series of awful massacres. The garrison
fought bravely, and repulsed the first attack; but a second drove Aston and his force back
to the Mill-Mount. "Our men getting up to them," ran Cromwell's terrible despatch, "were ordered
by me to put them all to the sword. And indeed, being in the heat of action, I forbade them
to spare any that were in arms in the town, and I think that night they put to death about
two thousand men." A few fled to St. Peter's church, "whereupon I ordered the steeple to be
fired, where one of them was heard to say in the midst of the flames: 'God damn me, I burn,
I burn.'" "In the church itself nearly one thousand were put to the sword. I believe all their
friars were knocked on the head promiscuously but two," but these were the sole exceptions
to the rule of killing the soldiers only. At a later time Cromwell challenged his enemies to
give "an instance of one man since my coming into Ireland, not in arms, massacred, destroyed,
or banished." But for soldiers there was no mercy. "I am persuaded," the despatch ends, "that
this is a righteous judgement of God upon these barbarous wretches who have imbrued their hands
in so much innocent blood, and that it will tend to prevent the effusion of blood for the future."

[Sidenote: Charles and the Scots.]

A detachment sufficed to relieve Derry and to quiet Ulster; and Cromwell turned to the south,
where as stout a defence was followed by as terrible a massacre at Wexford. A fresh success
at Ross brought him to Waterford; but the city held stubbornly out, disease thinned his army,
where there was scarce an officer who had not been sick, and the general himself was arrested
by illness. At last the tempestuous weather drove him into winter quarters at Cork with his
work half done. The winter of 1649 was one of terrible anxiety. The Parliament was showing
less and less inclination to dissolve itself, and was meeting the growing discontent by a stricter
censorship of the press and a fruitless prosecution of John Lilburne. English commerce was
being ruined by the piracies of Rupert's fleet, which now anchored at Kinsale to support the
Royalist cause in Ireland. The energy of Vane indeed had already re-created a navy, squadrons
of which were being despatched into the British seas, the Mediterranean, and the Levant; and
Colonel Blake, who had distinguished himself by his heroic defence of Taunton during the war,
was placed at the head of a fleet which drove Rupert from the Irish coast, and finally blockaded
him in the Tagus. But even the energy of Vane quailed before the danger which now broke on
England from the Scots. "One must go and die there," the young king cried at the news of Ormond's
defeat before Dublin, "for it is shameful for me to live elsewhere." But his ardour for an
Irish campaign cooled as Cromwell marched from victory to victory; and from the isle of Jersey,
which alone remained faithful to him of all his southern dominions, Charles renewed the negotiations
with Scotland which his hopes from Ireland had broken. They were again delayed by a proposal
on the part of Montrose to attack the very Government with whom his master was negotiating;
but the failure and death of the Marquis in the spring of 1650 forced Charles to accept the
Presbyterian conditions; and while an army was raised in the North, the young king prepared
to cross to his Scottish dominions.

[Sidenote: Cromwell in Scotland.]

Dismayed as they were, the English leaders resolved to anticipate the danger by attacking the
new enemy in his own home; but the Lord-General Fairfax, while willing to defend England against
a Scotch invasion, scrupled to take the lead in an invasion of Scotland. The Council recalled
Cromwell from Ireland, but his cooler head saw that there was yet time to finish his work in
the west. During the winter he had been busily preparing for a new campaign, and it was only
after the storm of Clonmell and the overthrow of the Irish army under Hugh O'Neill in the hottest
fight the army had yet fought, that he embarked for England. The new Lord-General entered London
amidst the shouts of a great multitude; and in July 1650, but a month after Charles had landed
on the shores of Scotland, the English army crossed the Tweed fifteen thousand men strong.
But the terror of his massacres in Ireland hung round its leader, the country was deserted
as he advanced, and he was forced to cling for provisions to a fleet which sailed along the
coast. The Scotch general, Leslie, with a larger force, refused battle, and lay obstinately
in his lines between Edinburgh and Leith. A march of the English army round his position to
the slopes of the Pentlands only brought about a change of the Scottish front; and as Cromwell
fell back baffled upon Dunbar, Leslie encamped upon the heights above the town, and cut off
the English retreat along the coast by the seizure of Cockburnspath. His post was almost unassailable,
while the soldiers of Cromwell were sick and starving; and their general had resolved on an
embarkation of his forces when he saw in the dusk of evening signs of movement in the Scottish
camp. Leslie's caution had at last been overpowered by the zeal of the preachers, and on the
morning of the third of September the Scotch army moved down to the lower ground between the
hillside on which it was encamped and a little brook which covered the English front. Leslie's
horse was far in advance of the main body, and it had hardly reached the level ground when
Cromwell in the dim dawn flung his whole force upon it. "They run, I profess they run!" he
cried as the Scotch horse broke after a desperate resistance, and threw into confusion the
foot who were hurrying to its aid. Then, as the sun rose over the mist of the morning, he added
in nobler words: "Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered! Like as the mist vanisheth,
so shalt Thou drive them away!" In less than an hour the victory was complete. The defeat at
once became a rout; ten thousand prisoners were taken, with all the baggage and guns; three
thousand were slain, with scarce any loss on the part of the conquerors. Leslie reached Edinburgh,
a general without an army.

[Sidenote: Break with Holland.]

The effect of Dunbar was at once seen in the attitude of the Continental powers. Spain hastened
to recognize the Republic, and Holland offered its alliance. But Cromwell was watching with
anxiety the growing discontent at home. He was anxious for a "settlement." He knew that for
such a settlement a new Parliament was necessary, and that England would never consent to be
ruled against her will by the mere rump of members gathered at Westminster. Yet every day made
it plainer that it was their purpose to continue to rule her. The general amnesty claimed by
Ireton and the bill for the Parliament's dissolution still hung on hand; the reform of the
courts of justice, which had been pressed by the army, failed before the obstacles thrown in
its way by the lawyers in the Commons. "Relieve the oppressed," Cromwell wrote from Dunbar,
"hear the groans of poor prisoners. Be pleased to reform the abuses of all professions. If
there be any one that makes many poor to make a few rich, that suits not a Commonwealth." But
the House was seeking to turn the current of public opinion in favour of its own continuance
by a great diplomatic triumph. It resolved secretly on the wild project of bringing about a
union between England and Holland, and it took advantage of Cromwell's victory to despatch
Oliver St. John with a stately embassy to the Hague. His rejection of an alliance and Treaty
of Commerce which the Dutch offered was followed by the disclosure of the English proposal
of union. The proposal was at once refused by the States; and the envoys, who returned angrily
to the Parliament, attributed their failure to the posture of affairs in Scotland. Charles
was preparing there for a new campaign. Humiliation after humiliation had been heaped on the
young king since he landed in his northern realm. He had subscribed to the Covenant; he had
listened to sermons and scoldings from the ministers; he was called on at last to sign a declaration
that acknowledged the tyranny of his father and the idolatry of his mother. Hardened and shameless
as he was, the young king for a moment recoiled. "I could never look my mother in the face
again," he cried, "after signing such a paper"; but he signed. He was still however a king
only in name, shut out from the Council and the army, with his friends excluded from all part
in government or the war. But he was freed by the victory of Dunbar. "I believe that the king
will set up on his own score now," Cromwell wrote after his victory, as he advanced to occupy
Edinburgh while the royal forces fell back upon Stirling and Perth. With the overthrow of Leslie
in fact the power of Argyle and the narrow Presbyterians whom he led came to an end. Hamilton,
the brother and successor of the Duke who had been captured at Preston, brought back the Royalists
to the camp, and Charles insisted on taking part in the Council and on being crowned at Scone.

[Sidenote: Worcester.]

Master of Edinburgh, but foiled in an attack on Stirling, Cromwell waited through the winter
and the long spring of 1651, while intestine feuds broke up the nation opposed to him, and
while the stricter Covenanters retired sulkily from the king's army on the return of the "Malignants,"
the Royalists of the earlier war, to its ranks. With summer the campaign recommenced, but Leslie
again fell back on his system of positions, and Cromwell, finding his camp at Stirling unassailable,
crossed into Fife and left the road open to the South. The bait was taken. In spite of Leslie's
counsels Charles resolved to invade England, and call the Royalist party again to revolt. He
was soon in full march through Lancashire upon the Severn, with the English horse under Lambert
hanging on his rear, and the English foot hastening by York and Coventry to close the road
to London. "We have done to the best of our judgement," Cromwell replied to the angry alarm
of the Parliament, "knowing that if some issue were not put to this business it would occasion
another winter's war." At Coventry he learned Charles's position, and swept round by Evesham
upon Worcester, where the Scotch king was encamped. Throwing half his force across the river,
Cromwell attacked the town on both sides on the third of September, the anniversary of his
victory at Dunbar. He led the van in person, and was "the first to set foot on the enemy's
ground." When Charles descended from the cathedral tower to fling himself on the division which
remained eastward of the Severn, Cromwell hurried back across the river, and was soon "riding
in the midst of the fire." For four or five hours, he told the Parliament, "it was as stiff
a contest as ever I have seen"; for though the Scots were outnumbered and beaten into the city,
they gave no answer but shot to offers of quarter, and it was not till nightfall that all was
over. The loss of the victors was as usual inconsiderable. The conquered lost six thousand
men, and all their baggage and artillery. Leslie was among the prisoners: Hamilton among the
dead. Charles himself fled from the field; and after months of strange wanderings and adventures
made his escape to France.

[Sidenote: Activity of the Parliament.]

"Now that the king is dead and his son defeated," Cromwell said gravely to the Parliament,
"I think it necessary to come to a settlement." But the settlement which had been promised
after Naseby was still as distant as ever after Worcester. The bill for dissolving the present
Parliament, though Cromwell pressed it in person, was only passed, after bitter opposition,
by a majority of two: and even this success had to be purchased by a compromise which permitted
the House to sit for three years more. Internal affairs were almost at a deadlock. The Parliament
appointed committees to prepare plans for legal reforms or for ecclesiastical reforms, but
it did nothing to carry them into effect. It was overpowered by the crowd of affairs which
the confusion of the war had thrown into its hands, by confiscations, sequestrations, appointments
to civil and military offices, in fact the whole administration of the State; and there were
times when it was driven to a resolve not to take any private affairs for weeks together in
order that it might make some progress with public business. To add to this confusion and muddle
there were the inevitable scandals which arose from it; charges of malversation and corruption
were hurled at the members of the House; and some, like Haselrig, were accused with justice
of using their power to further their own interests. The one remedy for all this was, as the
army saw, the assembly of a new and complete Parliament in place of the mere "rump" of the
old, but this was the one measure which the House was resolute to avert. Vane spurred it to
a new activity. In February 1652 the Amnesty Bill was forced through after fifteen divisions.
A Grand Committee, with Sir Matthew Hale at its head, was appointed to consider the reform
of the law. They were, on many points bitter enemies, on two they were always at one—Wordsworth
and Ossian! "Ossian is a feeling and a name that can never be destroyed in the minds of his readers.
"The poet Gray, too," says Wilson, "frequently in his Letters expresses his wonder and delight
in the beautiful and glorious inspirations of the Son of the Mist." Even Malcolm Laing—Macpherson's
most inveterate foe—who edited Ossian for the sole purpose of revenge,
exposure, and posthumous dissection, is compelled to say that "Macpherson's
genius is equal to that of any poet of his day, except perhaps Gray."

In another place (Bards of the Bible—'Jeremiah') we have thus spoken of Ossian:—"We are reminded
[by Jeremiah] of the 'Harp of Selma,' and of blind Ossian sitting amid the evening sunshine of
the Highland valley, and in tremulous, yet aspiring notes, telling to his small silent and weeping
circle, the tale of—

"Old, unhappy, far-off things, And battles long ago."

"It has become fashionable (through Macaulay chiefly) to abuse the Poems of Ossian; but, admitting
their forgery as well as faultiness, they seem to us in their better passages to approach more nearly
than any English prose to the force, vividness, and patriarchial simplicity and tenderness
of the Old Testament style. Lifting up, like a curtain, the mist of the past, they show us a world,
unique and intensely poetical, peopled by heroes, bards, maidens, and ghosts, who are separated
by their mist and their mountains from all countries and ages but their own. It is a great picture,
painted on clouds instead of canvass, and invested with colours as gorgeous as its shades are
dark. Its pathos has a wild sobbing in it, an Æolean tremulousness of tone, like the wail of spirits.
And than Ossian himself, the last of his race, answering the plaints of the wilderness, the
plover's shriek, the hiss of the homeless stream, the bee in the heather bloom, the rustle of the
birch above his head, the roar of the cataract behind, in a voice of kindred freedom and kindred melancholy,
conversing less with the little men around him than with the giant spirits of his fathers,
we have few finer figures in the whole compass of poetry. Ossian is a ruder "Robber," a more
meretricious "Seasons," like them a work of prodigal beauties and more prodigal faults, and
partly through both, has impressed the world."

Dr Johnson's opposition to Ossian is easily explained by his aversion to Scotland, by his detestation
of what he deemed a fraud, by his dislike for what he heard was Macpherson's private character,
and by his prejudice against all unrhymed poetry, whether it was blank verse or rhythmical
prose.

And yet, his own prose was rhythmical, and often as tumid as the
worst bombast in Macpherson.

He was too, on the whole, an artificial writer, while the best parts of Ossian are natural. He
allowed himself therefore to see distinctly and to characterise severely the bad things in
the book—where it sunk into the bathos or soared into the falsetto,—but ignored its beauties,
and was obstinately blind to those passages where it rose into real sublimity or melted into
melodious pathos.

Macaulay has, in various of his papers, shewn a fine sympathy with original genius. He has
done so notably in his always able and always generous estimate of Edmund Burke, and still
more in what he says of Shelley and of John Bunyan. It was his noble panegyric on the former
that first awakened the "late remorse of love" and admiration for that abused and outraged Shade.
And it was his article on Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress which gave it—popular as it had been
among religionists—a classical place in our literature, and that dared to compare the genius of its
author with that of Shakespere and of Milton. But he has failed to do justice to Ossian, partly
from some early prejudice at its author and his country, and partly from want of a proper early
Ossianic training. A portion of this experience is necessary to constitute a true "Child of the Mist";
and he that has had most of it—and that was Christopher North—was best fitted to appreciate
the shadowy, solitary, and pensively sublime spirit which tabernacles in Ossian's poetry.
Of this Macaulay had little or nothing, and, therefore, although no man knew the Highlands
in their manners, customs, and history better, he has utterly failed as a critic on Highland Poetry.

We might add to the names of those authors who appreciated Ossian,
Lord Byron, who imitates him in his "Hours of Idleness"; and are forced
to include among his detractors, Lord Brougham, who, in his review
of these early efforts, says clumsily, that he won't criticise it
lest he should be attacking Macpherson himself, with whose own "stuff"
he was but imperfectly acquainted, to which Lord Byron rejoins, that
(alluding to Lord Byron being a minor) he would have said a much cleverer
and severer thing had he quoted Dr Johnson's sarcasm, that "many men,
many women, and many children could write as well as Ossian."

[Sidenote: The Parliament driven out.]

A conference took place between the leaders of the Commons and the officers of the Army, who
resolutely demanded not only the omission of these clauses, but that the Parliament should
at once dissolve itself, and commit the new elections to a Council of State. "Our charge,"
retorted Haselrig, "cannot be transferred to any one." The conference was adjourned till the
next morning, on an understanding that no decisive step should be taken; but it had no sooner
reassembled on the twentieth of April than the absence of the leading members confirmed the
news that Vane was fast pressing the bill for a new Representative through the House. "It is
contrary to common honesty," Cromwell angrily broke out; and, quitting Whitehall, he summoned
a company of musketeers to follow him as far as the door of the Commons. He sate down quietly
in his place, "clad in plain grey clothes and grey worsted stockings," and listened to Vane's
passionate arguments. "I am come to do what grieves me to the heart," he said to his neighbour,
St. John; but he still remained quiet, till Vane pressed the House to waive its usual forms
and pass the bill at once. "The time has come," he said to Harrison. "Think well," replied
Harrison, "it is a dangerous work!" and Cromwell listened for another quarter of an hour. At
the question "that this bill do pass," he at length rose, and his tone grew higher as he repeated
his former charges of injustice, self-interest, and delay. "Your hour is come," he ended, "the
Lord hath done with you!" A crowd of members started to their feet in angry protest. "Come,
come," replied Cromwell, "we have had enough of this"; and striding into the midst of the chamber,
he clapt his hat on his head, and exclaimed, "I will put an end to your prating!" In the din
that followed his voice was heard in broken sentences--"It is not fit that you should sit here
any longer! You should give place to better men! You are no Parliament." Thirty musketeers
entered at a sign from their General, and the fifty members present crowded to the door. "Drunkard!"
Cromwell broke out as Wentworth passed him; and Marten was taunted with a yet coarser name.
Vane, fearless to the last, told him his act was "against all right and all honour." "Ah, Sir
Harry Vane, Sir Harry Vane," Cromwell retorted in bitter indignation at the trick he had been
played, "you might have prevented all this, but you are a juggler, and have no common honesty!
The Lord deliver me from Sir Harry Vane!" The Speaker refused to quit his seat, till Harrison
offered to "lend him a hand to come down." Cromwell lifted the mace from the table. "What shall
we do with this bauble?" he said. "Take it away!" The door of the House was locked at last,
and the dispersion of the Commons was followed a few hours after by that of their executive
committee, the Council of State. Cromwell himself summoned them to withdraw. "We have heard,"
replied the President, John Bradshaw, "what you have done this morning at the House, and in
some hours all England will hear it. But you mistake, sir, if you think the Parliament dissolved.
No power on earth can dissolve the Parliament but itself, be sure of that!"

CHAPTER XII

THE PROTECTORATE

1653-1660

[Sidenote: The Sword unveiled.]

The thin screen which the continuance of a little knot of representatives had thrown over the
rule of the sword was at last torn away. So long as an assembly which called itself a House
of Commons met at Westminster, men might still cling to a belief in the existence of a legal
government. But now that even this was gone such a belief was no longer possible. The army
itself had to recognize its own position. The dispersion of the Parliament and of the Council
of State left England without a government, for the authority of every official ended with
that of the body from which his power was derived; and Cromwell, as Captain-General, was forced
to recognize his responsibility for the maintenance of public order. The one power left in
England was the power of the sword. But, as in the revolution of 1648, so in the revolution
of 1653, no thought of military despotism can be fairly traced in the acts of the general or
the army. They were in fact far from regarding their position as a revolutionary one. Though
incapable of justification on any formal ground, their proceedings since the establishment
of the Commonwealth had as yet been substantially in vindication of the rights of the country
to representation and self-government; and public opinion had gone fairly with the army in
its demand for a full and efficient body of representatives, as well as in its resistance to
the project by which the Rump would have deprived half England of its right of election. It
was only when no other means existed of preventing such a wrong that the soldiers had driven
out the wrongdoers. "It is you that have forced me to this," Cromwell exclaimed, as he drove
the members from the House; "I have sought the Lord night and day that He would rather slay
me than put me upon the doing of this work." If the act was one of violence to the little group
who claimed to be a House of Commons, the act which it aimed at preventing was one of violence
on their part to the constitutional rights of the whole nation. The people had in fact been
"dissatisfied in every corner of the realm" at the state of public affairs: and the expulsion
of the members was ratified by a general assent. "We did not hear a dog bark at their going,"
the Protector said years afterwards. Whatever anxiety may have been felt at the use which was
like to be made of "the power of the sword," was in great part dispelled by a proclamation
of the officers. They professed that their one anxiety was "not to grasp the power ourselves
nor to keep it in military hands, no not for a day," and their promise to "call to the government
men of approved fidelity and honesty" was to some extent redeemed by the nomination of a provisional
Council of State, consisting of eight officers of high rank and four civilians, with Cromwell
as their head, and a seat in which was offered, though fruitlessly, to Vane.

[Sidenote: The Convention.]

The first business of such a body was clearly to summon a new Parliament and to resign its
trust into its hands. But the bill for Parliamentary reform had dropped with the expulsion
of the Rump; and reluctant as the Council was to summon a new Parliament on the old basis of
election, it shrank from the responsibility of effecting so fundamental a change as the creation
of a new basis by its own authority. It was this difficulty which led to the expedient of a
Constituent Convention. Cromwell told the story of this unlucky assembly some years after with
an amusing frankness. "I will come and tell you a story of my own weakness and folly. And yet
it was done in my simplicity--I dare avow it was. . . . It was thought then that men of our
own judgement, who had fought in the wars, and were all of a piece on that account--why, surely,
these men will hit it, and these men will do it to the purpose, whatever can be desired! And
surely we did think, and I did think so--the more blame to me!" Of the hundred and fifty-six
men, "faithful, fearing God, and hating covetousness," whose names were selected for this purpose
by the Council of State from lists furnished by the Congregational churches, the bulk were
men, like Ashley Cooper, of good blood and "free estates"; and the proportion of burgesses,
such as the leather-merchant, Praise-God Barebones, whose name was eagerly seized on as a nickname
for the body to which he belonged, seems to have been much the same as in earlier Parliaments.
But the circumstances of their choice told fatally on the temper of its members. Cromwell himself,
in the burst of rugged eloquence with which he welcomed their assembling on the fourth of July,
was carried away by a strange enthusiasm. "Convince the nation," he said, "that as men fearing
God have fought them out of their bondage under the regal power, so men fearing God do now
rule them in the fear of God. . . . Own your call, for it is of God: indeed it is marvellous,
and it hath been unprojected. . . . Never was a supreme power under such a way of owning God
and being owned by Him." A spirit yet more enthusiastic appeared in the proceedings of the
Convention itself.

[Sidenote: Its work.]

The resignation of their powers by Cromwell and the Council into its hands left it the one
supreme authority; but by the instrument which convoked it provision had been made that this
authority should be transferred in fifteen months to another assembly elected according to
its directions. Its work was, in fact, to be that of a constituent assembly, paving the way
for a Parliament on a really national basis. But the Convention put the largest construction
on its commission, and boldly undertook the whole task of constitutional reform. Committees
were appointed to consider the needs of the Church and the nation. The spirit of economy and
honesty which pervaded the assembly appeared in its redress of the extravagance which prevailed
in the civil service, and of the inequality of taxation. With a remarkable energy it undertook
a host of reforms, for whose execution England has had to wait to our own day. The Long Parliament
had shrunk from any reform of the Court of Chancery, where twenty-three thousand cases were
waiting unheard. The Convention proposed its abolition. The work of compiling a single code
of laws, begun under the Long Parliament by a committee with Sir Matthew Hale at its head,
was again pushed forward. The frenzied alarm which these bold measures aroused among the lawyer
class was soon backed by that of the clergy, who saw their wealth menaced by the establishment
of civil marriage and by proposals to substitute the free contributions of congregations for
the payment of tithes. The landed proprietors too rose against a scheme for the abolition of
lay-patronage, which was favoured by the Convention, and predicted an age of confiscation.
The "Barebones Parliament," as the assembly was styled in derision, was charged with a design
to ruin property, the Church, and the law, with enmity to knowledge, and a blind and ignorant
fanaticism.

[Sidenote: Close of the Convention.]

Cromwell himself shared the general uneasiness at its proceedings. His mind was that of an
administrator rather than that of a statesman, unspeculative, deficient in foresight, conservative,
and eminently practical. He saw the need of administrative reform in Church and State; but
he had no sympathy whatever with the revolutionary theories which were filling the air around
him. His desire was for "a settlement" which should be accompanied with as little disturbance
of the old state of things as possible. If Monarchy had vanished in the turmoil of war, his
experience of the Long Parliament only confirmed him in his belief of the need of establishing
an executive power of a similar kind, apart from the power of the legislature, as a condition
of civil liberty. His sword had won "liberty of conscience"; but, passionately as he clung
to it, he was still for an established Church, for a parochial system, and a ministry maintained
by tithes. His social tendencies were simply those of the class to which he belonged. "I was
by birth a gentleman," he told a later Parliament, and in the old social arrangement of "a
nobleman, a gentleman, a yeoman," he saw "a good interest of the nation and a great one." He
hated "that levelling principle" which tended to the reducing of all to one equality. "What
was the purport of it," he asks with an amusing simplicity, "but to make the tenant as liberal
a fortune as the landlord? Which, I think, if obtained, would not have lasted long. The men
of that principle, after they had served their own turns, would then have cried up property
and interest fast enough." To a practical temper such as this the speculative reforms of the
Convention were as distasteful as to the lawyers and clergy whom they attacked. "Nothing,"
said Cromwell, "was in the hearts of these men but 'overturn, overturn.'" In December however
he was delivered from his embarrassment by the internal dissensions of the Assembly itself.
The day after the decision against tithes the more conservative members snatched a vote by
surprise "that the sitting of this Parliament any longer, as now constituted, will not be for
the good of the Commonwealth, and that it is requisite to deliver up unto the Lord-General
the powers we received from him." The Speaker placed their abdication in Cromwell's hands,
and the act was confirmed by the subsequent adhesion of a majority of the members.

[Sidenote: The Instrument of Government.]

The dissolution of the Convention replaced matters in the state in which its assembly had found
them; but there was still the same general anxiety to substitute some sort of legal rule for
the power of the sword. The Convention had named during its session a fresh Council of State,
and this body at once drew up, under the name of the Instrument of Government, a remarkable
Constitution which was adopted by the Council of Officers. They were now driven by necessity
to the step from which they had shrunk, that of convening a Parliament on the reformed basis
of representation, though such a basis had no legal sanction. The House was to consist of four
hundred members from England, thirty from Scotland, and thirty from Ireland. The seats hitherto
assigned to small and rotten boroughs were transferred to larger constituencies, and for the
most part to counties. All special rights of voting in the election of members were abolished,
and replaced by a general right of suffrage, based on the possession of real or personal property
to the value of two hundred pounds. Catholics and "Malignants," as those who had fought for
the king were called, were excluded for the while from the franchise. Constitutionally all
further organization of the form of government should have been left to this Assembly; but
the dread of disorder during the interval of its election, as well as a longing for "settlement,"
drove the Council to complete their work by pressing the office of "Protector" upon Cromwell.
"They told me," he pleaded afterwards, "that except I would undertake the government they thought
things would hardly come to a composure or settlement, but blood and confusion would break
in as before." If we follow however his own statement, it was when they urged that the acceptance
of such a Protectorate actually limited his power as Lord-General, and "bound his hands to
act nothing without the consent of a Council until the Parliament," that the post was accepted.
The powers of the new Protector indeed were strictly limited. Though the members of the Council
were originally named by him, each member was irremovable save by consent of the rest: their
advice was necessary in all foreign affairs, their consent in matters of peace and war, their
approval in nominations to the great offices of State, or the disposal of the military or civil
power. With this body too lay the choice of all future Protectors. To the administrative check
of the Council was added the political check of the Parliament. Three years at the most were
to elapse between the assembling of one Parliament and another, and, once met, it could not
be prorogued or dissolved for five months. Laws could not be made nor taxes imposed but by
its authority, and after the lapse of twenty days the statutes it passed became laws, even
though the Protector's assent was refused to them. The new Constitution was undoubtedly popular;
and the promise of a real Parliament in a few months covered the want of any legal character
in the new rule. The Government was generally accepted as a provisional one, which could only
acquire legal authority from the ratification of its acts in the coming session; and the desire
to settle it on such a Parliamentary basis was universal among the members of the new Assembly
which met in September 1654 at Westminster.

[Sidenote: The Parliament of 1654.]

Few Parliaments have ever been more memorable, or more truly representative of the English
people, than the Parliament of 1654. It was the first Parliament in our history where members
from Scotland and Ireland sate side by side with those from England, as they sit in the Parliament
of to-day. The members for rotten boroughs and pocket-boroughs had disappeared. In spite of
the exclusion of Royalists and Catholics from the polling-booths, and the arbitrary erasure
of the names of a few ultra-republican members by the Council, the House had a better title
to the name of a "free Parliament" than any which had sat before. The freedom with which the
electors had exercised their right of voting was seen indeed in the large number of Presbyterian
members who were returned, and in the reappearance of Haselrig and Bradshaw, with many members
of the Long Parliament, side by side with Lord Herbert and the older Sir Harry Vane. The first
business of the House was clearly to consider the question of government; and Haselrig, with
the fiercer republicans, at once denied the legal existence of either Council or Protector,
on the ground that the Long Parliament had never been dissolved. Such an argument however told
as much against the Parliament in which they sate as against the administration itself, and
the bulk of the Assembly contented themselves with declining to recognize the Constitution
or Protectorate as of more than provisional validity. They proceeded at once to settle the
government on a Parliamentary basis. The "Instrument" was taken as the groundwork of the new
Constitution, and carried clause by clause. That Cromwell should retain his rule as Protector
was unanimously agreed; that he should possess the right of veto or a co-ordinate legislative
power with the Parliament was hotly debated, though the violent language of Haselrig did little
to disturb the general tone of moderation. Suddenly however Cromwell interposed. If he had
undertaken the duties of Protector with reluctance, he looked on all legal defects in his title
as more than supplied by the general acceptance of the nation. "I called not myself to this
place," he urged, "God and the people of these kingdoms have borne testimony to it." His rule
had been accepted by London, by the army, by the solemn decision of the judges, by addresses
from every shire, by the very appearance of the members of the Parliament in answer to his
writ. "Why may I not balance this Providence," he asked, "with any hereditary interest?" In
this national approval he saw a call from God, a Divine Right of a higher order than that of
the kings who had gone before.

[Sidenote: Cromwell's administration.]

But there was another ground for the anxiety with which Cromwell watched the proceedings of
the Commons. His passion for administration had far overstepped the bounds of a merely provisional
rule in the interval before the assembling of the Parliament. His desire for "settlement" had
been strengthened not only by the drift of public opinion, but by the urgent need of every
day; and the power reserved by the "Instrument" to issue temporary Ordinances "until further
order in such matters, to be taken by the Parliament," gave a scope to his marvellous activity
of which he at once took advantage. Sixty-four Ordinances had been issued in the nine months
before the meeting of the Parliament. Peace had been concluded with Holland. The Church had
been set in order. The law itself had been minutely regulated. The union with Scotland had
been brought to completion. So far was Cromwell from dreaming that these measures, or the authority
which enacted them, would be questioned, that he looked to Parliament simply to complete his
work. "The great end of your meeting," he said at the first assembly of its members, "is healing
and settling." Though he had himself done much, he added, "there was still much to be done."
Peace had to be made with Portugal, and alliance with Spain. Bills were laid before the House
for the codification of the law. The plantation and settlement of Ireland had still to be completed.
He resented the setting these projects aside for constitutional questions which, as he held,
a Divine call had decided, and he resented yet more the renewed claim advanced by Parliament
to the sole power of legislation. As we have seen, his experience of the evils which had arisen
from the concentration of legislative and executive power in the Long Parliament had convinced
Cromwell of the danger to public liberty which lay in such a union. He saw in the joint government
of "a single person and a Parliament" the only assurance "that Parliaments should not make
themselves perpetual," or that their power should not be perverted to public wrong.

[Sidenote: Dissolution of the Parliament.]

But whatever strength there may have been in the Protector's arguments, the act by which he
proceeded to enforce them was fatal to liberty, and in the end to Puritanism. "If my calling
be from God," he ended, "and my testimony from the People, God and the People shall take it
from me, else I will not part from it." And he announced that no member would be suffered to
enter the House without signing an engagement "not to alter the Government as it is settled
in a single person and a Parliament." No act of the Stuarts had been a bolder defiance of constitutional
law; and the act was as needless as it was illegal. One hundred members alone refused to take
the engagement, and the signatures of three-fourths of the House proved that the security Cromwell
desired might have been easily procured by a vote of Parliament. But those who remained resumed
their constitutional task with unbroken firmness. They quietly asserted their sole title to
government by referring the Protector's Ordinances to Committees for revision, and for conversion
into laws. The "Instrument of Government" was turned into a bill, debated, and after some serious
modifications read a third time. Money votes, as in previous Parliaments, were deferred till
"grievances" had been settled. But Cromwell once more intervened. The Royalists were astir
again; and he attributed their renewed hopes to the hostile attitude which he ascribed to the
Parliament. The army, which remained unpaid while the supplies were delayed, was seething with
discontent. "It looks," said the Protector, "as if the laying grounds for a quarrel had rather
been designed than to give the people settlement. Judge yourselves whether the contesting of
things that were provided for by this government hath been profitable expense of time for the
good of this nation." In January 1655, with words of angry reproach he declared the Parliament
dissolved.

[Sidenote: The Major-Generals.]

The dissolution of the Parliament of 1654 was a turning-point in the relations of England and
the army. As yet neither the people nor the soldiers had fairly recognized the actual state
of affairs. From the revolution of 1648 the sword had been supreme, but its supremacy had been
disguised by the continuance of the Rump. When the Rump was expelled, the military rule which
followed still seemed only provisional. The bulk of Englishmen and the bulk of the army itself
looked on its attitude as simply imposed on it by necessity, and believed that with the assembly
of a Parliament all would return to a legal course. But the Parliament had come and gone; and
the army still refused to lay down the sword. On the contrary, it seemed at last to resolve
to grasp frankly the power which it had so long shrunk from openly wielding. All show of constitutional
rule was now at an end. The Protectorate, deprived by its own act of all chance of legal sanction,
became a simple tyranny. Cromwell professed indeed to be restrained by the "Instrument": but
the one great restraint on his power which the Instrument provided, the inability to levy taxes
save by consent of Parliament, was set aside on the plea of necessity. "The People," said the
Protector in words which Strafford might have uttered, "will prefer their real security to
forms." That a danger of Royalist revolt existed was undeniable, but the danger was at once
doubled by the general discontent. From this moment, Whitelock tells us, "many sober and noble
patriots," in despair of public liberty, "did begin to incline to the king's restoration."
In the mass of the population the reaction was far more rapid. "Charles Stuart," writes a Cheshire
correspondent to the Secretary of State, "hath five hundred friends in these adjacent counties
for every one friend to you among them." But before the overpowering strength of the army even
this general discontent was powerless. Yorkshire, where the Royalist insurrection was expected
to be most formidable, never ventured to rise at all. There were risings in Devon, Dorset,
and the Welsh Marches, but they were quickly put down, and their leaders brought to the scaffold.
Easily however as the revolt was suppressed, the terror of the Government was seen in the energetic
measures to which Cromwell resorted in the hope of securing order. The country was divided
into ten military governments, each with a major-general at its head, who was empowered to
disarm all Papists and Royalists, and to arrest suspected persons. Funds for the support of
this military despotism were provided by an Ordinance of the Council of State, which enacted
that all who had at any time borne arms for the king should pay every year a tenth part of
their income, in spite of the Act of Oblivion, as a fine for their royalist tendencies. The
despotism of the major-generals was seconded by the older expedients of tyranny. The ejected
clergy had been zealous in promoting the insurrection, and they were forbidden in revenge to
act as chaplains or as tutors. The press was placed under a strict censorship. The payment
of taxes levied by the sole authority of the Protector was enforced by distraint; and when
a collector was sued in the courts for redress, the counsel for the prosecution were sent to
the Tower.

[Sidenote: Settlement of Scotland.]

If pardon indeed could ever be won for a tyranny, the wisdom and grandeur with which he used
the power he had usurped would win pardon for the Protector. The greatest among the many great
enterprises undertaken by the Long Parliament had been the union of the three Kingdoms: and
that of Scotland with England had been brought about, at the very end of its career, by the
tact and vigour of Sir Harry Vane. But its practical realization was left to Cromwell. In four
months of hard fighting General Monk brought the Highlands to a new tranquillity; and the presence
of an army of eight thousand men, backed by a line of forts, kept the most restless of the
clans in good order. The settlement of the country was brought about by the temperance and
sagacity of Monk's successor, General Deane. No further interference with the Presbyterian
system was attempted beyond the suppression of the General Assembly. But religious liberty
was resolutely protected, and Deane ventured even to interfere on behalf of the miserable victims
whom Scotch bigotry was torturing and burning on the charge of witchcraft. Even steady Royalists
acknowledged the justice of the Government and the wonderful discipline of its troops. "We
always reckon those eight years of the usurpation," said Burnet afterwards, "a time of great
peace and prosperity."

[Sidenote: Settlement of Ireland.]

Sterner work had to be done before Ireland could be brought into real union with its sister
kingdoms. The work of conquest had been continued by Ireton, and completed after his death
by General Ludlow, as mercilessly as it had begun. Thousands perished by famine or the sword.
Shipload after shipload of those who surrendered were sent over sea for sale into forced labour
in Jamaica and the West Indies. More than forty thousand of the beaten Catholics were permitted
to enlist for foreign service, and found a refuge in exile under the banners of France and
Spain. The work of settlement, which was undertaken by Henry Cromwell, the younger and abler
of the Protector's sons, turned out to be even more terrible than the work of the sword. It
took as its model the Colonization of Ulster, the fatal measure which had destroyed all hope
of a united Ireland, and had brought inevitably in its train the revolt and the war. The people
were divided into classes in the order of their assumed guilt. All who after trial were proved
to have personally taken part in the "massacre" were sentenced to banishment or death. The
general amnesty which freed "those of the meaner sort" from all question on other scores was
far from extending to the landowners. Catholic proprietors who had shown no goodwill to the
Parliament, even though they had taken no part in the war, were punished by the forfeiture
of a third of their estates. All who had borne arms were held to have forfeited the whole,
and driven into Connaught, where fresh estates were carved out for them from the lands of the
native clans. No such doom had ever fallen on a nation in modern times as fell upon Ireland
in its new settlement. Among the bitter memories which part Ireland from England the memory
of the bloodshed and confiscation which the Puritans wrought remains the bitterest; and the
worst curse an Irish peasant can hurl at his enemy is "the curse of Cromwell." But pitiless
as the Protector's policy was, it was successful in the ends at which it aimed. The whole native
population lay helpless and crushed. Peace and order were restored, and a large incoming of
Protestant settlers from England and Scotland brought a new prosperity to the wasted country.
Above all, the legislative union which had been brought about with Scotland was now carried
out with Ireland, and thirty seats were allotted to its representatives in the general Parliament.

[Sidenote: Settlement of England.]

In England Cromwell dealt with the Royalists as irreconcileable enemies; but in every other
respect he carried fairly out his pledge of "healing and settling." The series of administrative
reforms planned by the Convention had been partially carried into effect before the meeting
of Parliament in 1654; but the work was pushed on after the dissolution of the House with yet
greater energy. Nearly a hundred ordinances showed the industry of the Government. Police,
public amusements, roads, finances, the condition of prisons, the imprisonment of debtors,
were a few among the subjects which claimed Cromwell's attention. An ordinance of more than
fifty clauses reformed the Court of Chancery. The anarchy which had reigned in the Church since
the breakdown of Episcopacy and the failure of the Presbyterian system to supply its place,
was put an end to by a series of wise and temperate measures for its reorganization. Rights
of patronage were left untouched; but a Board of Triers, a fourth of whom were laymen, was
appointed to examine the fitness of ministers presented to livings; and a Church board of gentry
and clergy was set up in every county to exercise a supervision over ecclesiastical affairs,
and to detect and remove scandalous and ineffectual ministers. Even by the confession of Cromwell's
opponents the plan worked well. It furnished the country with "able, serious preachers," Baxter
tells us, "who lived a godly life, of what tolerable opinion soever they were"; and, as both
Presbyterian and Congregationalist ministers were presented to livings at the will of their
patrons, it solved so far as practical working was concerned the problem of a religious union
among Protestants on the base of a wide variety of Christian opinion. From the Church which
was thus reorganized all power of interference with faiths differing from its own was resolutely
withheld. Save in his dealings with the Episcopalians, whom he looked on as a political danger,
Cromwell remained true throughout to the cause of religious liberty. Even the Quaker, rejected
by all other Christian bodies as an anarchist and blasphemer, found sympathy and protection
in the Protector. The Jews had been excluded from England since the reign of Edward the First;
and a prayer which they now presented for leave to return was refused by a commission of merchants
and divines to whom the Protector referred it for consideration. But the refusal was quietly
passed over, and the connivance of Cromwell in the settlement of a few Hebrews in London and
Oxford was so clearly understood that no one ventured to interfere with them.

[Sidenote: Cromwell's foreign policy.]

No part of his policy is more characteristic of Cromwell's mind, whether in its strength or
in its weakness, than his management of foreign affairs. While England had been absorbed in
her long and obstinate struggle for freedom the whole face of the world around her had changed.
The Thirty Years War was over. The victories of Gustavus, and of the Swedish generals who followed
him, had been seconded by the policy of Richelieu and the intervention of France. Protestantism
in Germany was no longer in peril from the bigotry or ambition of the House of Austria; and
the Treaty of Westphalia had drawn a permanent line between the territories belonging to the
adherents of the old religion and the new. There was little danger indeed now to Europe from
the great Catholic House which had threatened its freedom ever since Charles the Fifth. Its
Austrian branch was called away from dreams of aggression in the west to a desperate struggle
with the Turk for the possession of Hungary and the security of Austria itself. Spain, from
causes which it is no part of our present story to detail, was falling into a state of strange
decrepitude. So far from aiming to be mistress of Europe, she was rapidly sinking into the
almost helpless prey of France. It was France which had now become the dominant power in Christendom,
though her position was far from being as commanding as it was to become under Lewis the Fourteenth.
The peace and order which prevailed after the cessation of the religious troubles throughout
her compact and fertile territory gave scope at last to the quick and industrious temper of
the French people; while her wealth and energy were placed by the centralizing administration
of Henry the Fourth, of Richelieu, and of Mazarin, almost absolutely in the hands of the Crown.
Under the three great rulers who have just been named her ambition was steadily directed to
the same purpose of territorial aggrandizement, and though limited as yet to the annexation
of the Spanish and Imperial territories which still parted her frontier from the Pyrenees,
the Alps, and the Rhine, a statesman of wise political genius would have discerned the beginning
of that great struggle for supremacy over Europe at large which was only foiled by the genius
of Marlborough and the victories of the Grand Alliance.

[Sidenote: Cromwell and Spain.]

But in his view of European politics Cromwell was misled by the conservative and unspeculative
temper of his mind as well as by the strength of his religious enthusiasm. Of the change in
the world around him he seems to have discerned nothing. He brought to the Europe of Mazarin
the hopes and ideas with which all England was thrilling in his youth at the outbreak of the
Thirty Years War. Spain was still to him "the head of the Papal Interest," whether at home
or abroad. "The Papists in England," he said to the Parliament of 1656, "have been accounted,
ever since I was born, Spaniolized; they never regarded France, or any other Papist state,
but Spain only." The old English hatred of Spain, the old English resentment at the shameful
part which the nation had been forced to play in the great German struggle by the policy of
James and of Charles, lived on in Cromwell, and was only strengthened by the religious enthusiasm
which the success of Puritanism had kindled within him. "The Lord Himself," he wrote to his
admirals as they sailed to the West Indies, "hath a controversy with your enemies; even with
that Romish Babylon of which the Spaniard is the great underpropper. In that respect we fight
the Lord's battles." What Sweden had been under Gustavus, England, Cromwell dreamed, might
be now--the head of a great Protestant League in the struggle against Catholic aggression.
"You have on your shoulders," he said to the Parliament of 1654, "the interest of all the Christian
people of the world. I wish it may be written on our hearts to be zealous for that interest."
The first step in such a struggle would necessarily be to league the Protestant powers together,
and Cromwell's earliest efforts were directed to bring the ruinous and indecisive quarrel with
Holland to an end. The fierceness of the strife had grown with each engagement; but the hopes
of Holland fell with her admiral, Tromp, who received a mortal wound at a moment when he had
succeeded in forcing the English line; and the skill and energy of his successor, De Ruyter,
struggled in vain to restore her waning fortunes. She was saved by the expulsion of the Long
Parliament, which had persisted in its demand for a political union of the two countries; and
the new policy of Cromwell was seen in the conclusion of peace. The peace indeed was dearly
bought. Not only did the United Provinces recognize the supremacy of the English flag in the
British seas, and submit to the Navigation Act, but Holland pledged itself to shut out the
House of Orange from power, and thus relieved England from the risk of seeing a Stuart restoration
supported by Dutch forces.

[Sidenote: War with Spain.]

The peace which was concluded with the Dutch in 1654 was followed by the conclusion of like
treaties with Sweden and with Denmark; and on the arrival of a Swedish envoy with offers of
a league of friendship Cromwell endeavoured to bring the Dutch, the Brandenburgers, and the
Danes into a confederation of the Protestant powers. His efforts in this direction however,
though they never wholly ceased, remained fruitless; but the Protector was resolute to carry
out his plans single-handed. The defeat of the Dutch had left England the chief sea-power of
the world; and in the first days of 1655, before the dissolution of the Parliament, two fleets
put to sea with secret instructions. The first, under Blake, appeared in the Mediterranean,
exacted reparation from Tuscany for wrongs done to English commerce, bombarded Algiers, and
destroyed the fleet with which its pirates had ventured through the reign of Charles to insult
the English coast. The thunder of Blake's guns, every Puritan believed, would be heard in the
castle of St. Angelo, and Rome itself would have to bow to the greatness of Cromwell. But though
no declaration of war had been issued against Spain, the true aim of both expeditions was an
attack on that power; and the attack proved singularly unsuccessful. Though Blake sailed to
the Spanish coast, he failed to intercept the treasure fleet from America; and the second expedition,
which made its way to the West Indies, was foiled in a descent on St. Domingo. It conquered
Jamaica in May; but the conquest of this lesser island, important as it really was in breaking
through the monopoly of the New World in the South which Spain had till now enjoyed, seemed
at the time but a poor result for the vast expenditure of money and blood. The leaders of the
expedition, Blake and Venables, were committed to the Tower on their return in September; but
Cromwell found himself at war with Spain, and thrown whether he would or no into the hands
of Mazarin.

[Sidenote: Parliament of 1655.]

In October 1655 he was forced to sign a treaty of alliance with France; while the cost of his
abortive expeditions drove him again to face a Parliament. But Cromwell no longer trusted,
as in his earlier Parliament, to freedom of election. The sixty members who were returned under
the Ordinances of union by Scotland and Ireland were simply nominees of the Government. Its
whole influence was exerted to secure the return of the more conspicuous members of the Council
of State. It was calculated that of the members returned one-half were bound to the Government
by ties of profit or place. But Cromwell was still unsatisfied. A certificate of the Council
was required from each member before admission to the House when it met in September 1656;
and a fourth of the whole number returned--one hundred in all, with Haselrig at their head--were
by this means excluded on grounds of disaffection or want of religion. To these arbitrary acts
of violence the House replied only by a course of singular moderation and wisdom. From the
first it disclaimed any purpose of opposing the Government. One of its earliest acts provided
securities for Cromwell's person, which was threatened by constant plots of assassination.
It supported him in his war policy, and voted supplies of unprecedented extent for the maintenance
of the struggle. It was this attitude of loyalty which gave force to its steady refusal to
sanction the system of tyranny which had practically placed England under martial law. In his
opening address Cromwell boldly took his stand in support of the military despotism wielded
by the major-generals. "It hath been more effectual towards the discountenancing of vice and
settling religion than anything done these fifty years. I will abide by it," he said, with
singular vehemence, "notwithstanding the envy and slander of foolish men. I could as soon venture
my life with it as with anything I ever undertook. If it were to be done again, I would do
it." But no sooner had a bill been introduced into Parliament to confirm the proceedings of
the major-generals than a long debate showed the temper of the Commons. They had resolved to
acquiesce in the Protectorate, but they were equally resolved to bring it again to a legal
mode of government. This indeed was the aim of even Cromwell's wiser adherents. "What makes
me fear the passing of this Act," one of them wrote to his son Henry, "is that thereby his
Highness' government will be more founded in force, and more removed from that natural foundation
which the people in Parliament are desirous to give him, supposing that he will become more
theirs than now he is." The bill was rejected, and Cromwell bowed to the feeling of the nation
by withdrawing the powers of the major-generals. 

"What did she say, Whinnie?"

I demanded, doing my best to keep cool.

"Naethin'," was Whinnie's grim retort. "'Twas me did the sayin'!"

"What did you say?" I asked, disturbed by the none too gentle look on his face.

"What was needed to be said," that old sour-dough with the lack-luster eyes quietly informed
me.

"What did you say?" I repeated, with a quavery feeling just under my floating ribs, alarmed at
the after-light of audacity that still rested on his face, like wine-glow on a rocky mountain-tip.

"I
said," Whinstane Sandy informed me with his old shoulders thrust back and his stubby forefinger
pointed to within a few inches of my nose, "I said that I kenned her and her kind well, havin'
watched the likes o' her ridden out o' Dawson City on a rail more times than once. I said that
she was naethin' but a wanton"--only this was not the word Whinnie used--"a wanton o' Babylon
and a temptress o' men and a corrupter o' homes out o' her time and place, bein' naught but
a soft shinin' thing that was a mockery to the guid God who made her and a blight to the face
o' the open prairie that she was foulin' with her presence. I said that she'd brought shame and
sorrow to a home that had been filled with happiness until she crept into it like the serpent o'
hell she was, and seein' she'd come into a lonely land where the people have the trick o' tryin'
their own cases after their own way and takin' when need be justice into their own hands, she'd
have one week, one week o' seven days and no more, to gather up what belonged to her and take
herself back to the cities o' shame where she'd find more o' her kind. And if she was not disposed
to hearken a friendly and timely word such as I was givin' her, I said, she'd see herself taken
out o' her home, and her hoorish body stripped to the skin, and then tarred and feathered, and
ridden on the cap-rail of a corral-gate out of a settlement that had small taste for her company!"

"Whinnie!"
I gasped, sitting down out of sheer weakness, "you didn't say that?"

"I said it," was Whinnie's laconic retort.

"But what right had you to--"

He cut me short with a grunt that was almost disrespectful.

"I not only said it," he triumphantly affirmed, "but what's more to my likin', I made her believe
it, leavin' her with the mockin' laugh dead in her eyes and her face as white as yon table-cover,
white to the lips!"

Sunday the Twenty-seventh

I've been just a little mystified, to-day, by Whinstane Sandy's movements. As soon as breakfast
was over and his chores were done he was off on the trail. I kept my eye on him as he went, to
satisfy myself that he was not heading for Casa Grande, where no good could possibly come of
his visitations.

For I've been most emphatic to Whinstane Sandy in the matter of his delightful little lynch-law
program. There shall be no tarring and feathering of women by any man in my employ. That may
have been possible in the Klondike in the days of the gold-rush, but it's not possible in this
country and this day of grace--except in the movies. And life is not so simple that you can
ride its problems away on the cap-rail from a corral. It's unfortunate that that absurd old
sour-dough, for all his good intentions, ever got in touch with Lady Alicia. I have, in fact,
strictly forbidden him to repeat his visit to Casa Grande, under any circumstances.

But a number of things combine to persuade me that he's not being as passive as he pretends.
He's even sufficiently forgotten his earlier hostility toward Peter to engage in long and guarded
conversation with that gentleman, as the two of them made a pretense of bolting the new anchor-timbers
to the heel of the windmill tower.

So at supper to-night I summoned up sufficient courage to ask Peter
what he knew about the situation.

He replied that he knew more than he wanted to, and more than he relished. That reply proving
eminently unsatisfactory, I further inquired what he thought of Lady Alicia. He somewhat startled
and shocked me by retorting that according to his own personal way of thinking she ought to
be spanked until she glowed.

I was disappointed in Peter about this. I had always thought of him as on a higher plane than poor
old Whinnie. But he was equally atavistic, once prejudice had taken possession of him, for what
he suggested must be regarded as not one whit more refined than tar and feathers. As for myself,
I'd like to choke her, only I haven't the moral courage to admit it to anybody.

Thursday the First

Lady Alicia has announced, I learn through a Struthers quite pop-eyed with indignation, that
it's Peter and I who possibly ought to be tarred and feathered, if our puritanical community is
deciding to go in for that sort of thing! It is to laugh.

Her ladyship, I also learn, has purchased about all the small-arms ammunition in Buckhorn and toted
the same back to Casa Grande in her car. There, in unobstructed view of the passers-by, she
has set up a target, on which, by the hour together, she coolly and patiently practises sharpshooting
with both rifle and revolver.

I admire that woman's spunk.

And whatever you may do, you can't succeed in bullying the English. They have too much of the
bull-dog breed in their bones. They're always at their best, Peter declares, when they're
fighting. "But from an Englishwoman trying to be kittenish," he fervently added, "good Lord, deliver
us all!"

And that started us talking about the English. Peter, of course, is too tolerant to despise his
cousins across the Pond, but he pregnantly reminded me that Lady Allie had asked him what sort
of town Saskatchewan was and he had retorted by inquiring if she was fond of Yonkers, whereupon
she'd looked puzzled and acknowledged that she'd never eaten one. For Peter and Lady Allie,
it seems, had had a set-to about American map-names, which her ladyship had described as both
silly and unsayable, especially the Indian ones, while Peter had grimly proclaimed that any people
who called Seven-Oaks Snooks and Belvoir Beever and Ruthven Rivven and Wrottesley Roxly and
Marylebone Marrabun and Wrensfordsley Wrensley had no right to kick about American pronunciations.

But
Peter is stimulating, even though he does stimulate you into opposition. So I found myself defending
the English, and especially the Englishman, for too many of them had made me happy in their lovely old
homes and too many of their sons, æons and æons ago, had tried to hold my hand.

"Your Englishman," I proclaimed to Peter, "always acts as though he quite disapproves of you
and yet he'll go to any amount of trouble to do things to make you happy or comfortable. Then
he conceals his graciousness by being curt about it. Then, when he's at his crankiest, he's apt
to startle you by saying the divinest things point-blank in your face, and as likely as not,
after treating you as he would a rather backward child of whom he rigidly disapproves, he'll make
love to you and do it with a fine old Anglo-Saxon directness. He hates swank, of course, for
he's a truffle-hound who prefers digging out his own delicacies. And it's ten to one, if a woman
simply sits tight and listens close and says nothing, that he'll say something about her unrivaled
powers of conversation!"

Sunday the Fourth

Peter, as we sat out beside the corral on an empty packing-case to-night after supper, said that
civilization was a curse. "Look what it's doing to your noble Red Man right here in your midst!
There was a time, when a brave died, they handsomely killed that
dead brave's favorite horse, feeling he would course the plains of
Heaven in peace.

Now, I find, they have their doubts, and they pick out a dying old
bone-yard whose day is over, or an outlaw that nobody can break and
ride.

And form without faith is a mockery. It's the same with us whites. Here we are, us two, with--"

But
I stopped Peter. I had no wish to slide on rubber-ice just for the sake of seeing it bend.

"Can you imagine anything lovelier," I remarked as a derailer, "than the prairie at this time
of the year, and this time of day?"

Peter followed my eye out over the undulating and uncounted acres of sage-green grain with an
eternity of opal light behind them.

"Think of LaVérendrye, who was their Columbus," he meditated aloud. "Going on and on, day by day, week
by week, wondering what was beyond that world of plain and slough and coulée and everlasting
green! And they tell me there's four hundred million arable acres of it. I wonder if old Vérendrye
ever had an inkling of what Whittier felt later on:

'I hear the tread of pioneers, Of cities yet to be-- The first low wash of waves where soon Shall
roll a human sea.'"

Then Peter went on to say that Bryant had given him an entirely false idea of the prairie, since
from the Bryant poem he'd expected to see grass up to his armpits. And he'd been disappointed,
too, by the scarcity of birds and flowers.

But I couldn't let that complaint go by unchallenged. I told him of our range-lilies and foxglove and
buffalo-beans and yellow crowfoot and wild sunflowers and prairie-roses and crocuses and even
violets in some sections. "And the prairie-grasses, Peter--don't forget the prairie-grasses,"
I concluded, perplexed for a moment by the rather grim smile that crept up into his rather solemn
old Peter-Panish face.

"I'm not likely to," he remarked.

For to-morrow, I remembered, Peter is going off to cut hay.

He has been speaking of it as going into the wilderness for meditation. But what he's really doing
is taking a team and his tent and supplies and staying with that hay until it's cut, cut and
"collected," to use the word which the naive Lady Allie introduced into these parts.

I have a suspicion that it is the wagging of tongues that's sending Peter out into his wilderness.
But I've been busy getting his grub-box ready and I can at least see that he fares well. For
whatever happens, we must have hay. And before long, since we're to go in more and more for live
stock, we must have a silo at Alabama Ranch. Now that the open range is a thing of the past,
in this part of the country at least, the silo is the natural solution of the cattle-feed
problem. It means we can double our stock, which is rather like getting another farm for nothing, especially
as the peas and oats we can grow for ensilage purposes give such enormous yields on this soil
of ours.

Tuesday the Sixth

For the second time the unexpected has happened. Lady Alicia has gone. She's off, bag and baggage,
and has left the redoubtable Sing Lo in charge of Casa Grande.

Her ladyship waited until one full day after the time-limit imposed upon her by Whinstane Sandy
in that barbarous armistice of his, and then, having saved her face, joined the Broadhursts of Montreal
on a trip to Banff, where she'll be more in touch with her kind and her countrymen. From there, I
understand, she intends visiting the Marquis of Anglesey ranch at Wallachie.

I don't know what she intends doing about her property, but it seems to me it doesn't show any
great interest in either her crop or her cousin, to decamp at this
particular time.

Struthers protests that she's a born gambler, and can't live without
bridge and American poker.

Banff, accordingly, ought to give her what she's pining for....

But I'm too busy to worry about Lady Allie. The Big Drama of the year is opening on this sun-steeped
plain of plenty, for harvest-time will soon be here and we've got to be ready for it. We're on
the go from six in the morning until sun-down. We're bringing in Peter's crop of hay with the
tractor, hauling three wagon-loads at a time. I make the double trip, getting back just in
time to feed my babies and then hiking out again. That means we're all hitting on every cylinder.
I've no time for either worries or wishes, though Peter once remarked that life is only as deep
as its desires, and that the measure of our existence lies in the extent of its wants. That
may be true, in a way, but I haven't time to philosophize over it. Hard work can be more than
a narcotic. It's almost an anesthetic. And soil, I've been thinking, should be the symbol
of life here, as it is with the peasants of Poland. I feel that I'm getting thinner, but I've
an appetite that I'm ashamed of, in secret.

Dinky-Dunk, by the way, is not back yet, and there's been no word from him. Struthers is resolute
in her belief that he's in hiding somewhere about the mountain-slopes of Banff. But I am just
as resolute in my scorn for all such suspicions. And yet, and yet,--if I wasn't so busy I'd be
tempted to hold solemn days of feasting and supplication that Lady Alicia Elizabeth Newland
might wade out beyond her depth in the pellucid waters of Lake Louise.

Friday the Sixteenth

Peter surprised me yesterday by going in to Buckhorn and bringing out a machinist to work on
the windmill tower. By mid-afternoon they had it ready for hoisting and rebolting to its new anchor-posts.
So just before supper the team and the block-and-tackle were hitched on to that attenuated steel
skeleton, Whinnie took one guide rope and I took the other, and our little Eiffel Tower slowly
lifted itself up into the sky.

Peter, when it was all over, and the last nut tightened up, walked about with the triumphant smile
of a Master-Builder who beholds his work completed. So I said "Hello, Halvard Solness!" as I stepped
over to where he stood.

And he was bright enough to catch it on the wing, for he quoted back
to me, still staring up at the tower-head: "From this day forward
I will be a free builder."

Whereupon I carelessly retorted, "Oh, there's some parts of Ibsen that I despise."

But something in Peter's tone and his preoccupation during supper both worried and perplexed me.
So as soon as I could get away from the shack I went out to the windmill tower again. And the
small platform at the end of the sloping little iron ladder looked so tempting and high above the
world that I started up the galvanized rungs.

When I was half-way up I stopped and looked down. It made me dizzy, for prairie life gives
you few chances of getting above the flat floor of your flat old world. But I was determined to conquer
that feeling, and by keeping my eyes turned up toward the windmill head I was able to reach
the little platform at the top and sit there with my feet hanging over and my right arm linked
through one of the steel standards.

I suppose, as windmills go, it wasn't so miraculously high, but it was amazing how even that
moderate altitude where I found myself could alter one's view-point. I felt like a sailor in
a crow's-nest, like a sentinel on a watch-tower, like an eagle poised giddily above the world.
And such a wonderful and wide-flung world it was, spreading out beneath me in mottled patches
of grape-leaf green and yellow and gold, with a burgundian riot of color along the western sky-line
where the last orange rind of the sun had just slipped down out of sight.

As I stared down at the roof of our shack it looked small and pitiful, tragically meager to house
the tangled human destinies it was housing. And the fields where we'd labored and sweated took
on a foreign and ghostly coloring, as though they were oblongs on the face of an alien world,
a world with mystery and beauty and unfathomable pathos about it.

I was sitting there, with my heels swinging out in space and an oddly
consoling sense of calmness in my heart, when Peter came out of the
shack and started to cross toward the corral.

I couldn't resist the temptation to toss my old straw hat down at him.

He stopped short as it fell within twenty paces of him, like a meteor out of the sky. Then
he turned and stared up at me. The next minute I saw him knock out his little briar pipe, put
it away in his pocket, and cross over to the tower.

I could feel the small vibrations of the steel structure on which I sat poised, as he mounted
the ladder toward me. And it felt for all the world like sitting on the brink of Heaven, like
a blessed damozel the second, watching a sister-soul coming up to join you in your beatitude.

"I say, isn't this taking a chance?" asked Peter, a little worried and a little out of breath,
as he clambered up beside me.

"It's glorious!" I retorted, with a nod toward the slowly paling sky-line.

That far and lonely horizon looked as though a fire of molten gold burned behind the thinnest
of mauve and saffron and purple curtains, a fire that was too subdued to be actual flame, but
more an unearthly and ethereal radiance, luring the vision on and on until it brought an odd
little sense of desolation to the heart and made me glad to remember that Peter was swinging
his lanky legs there at my side out over empty space.

"I find," he observed, "that this tower was sold to a tenderfoot, by the foot. That's why it went
over. It was too highfalutin! It was thirty feet taller than it had any need to be."

Then he dropped back into silence.

I finally became conscious of the fact that Peter, instead of staring at the sunset, was staring
at me. And I remembered that my hair was half down, trailing across my nose, and that three distinctly
new freckles had shown themselves that week on the bridge of that same nose.

"O God, but you're lovely!" he said in a half-smothered and shamefaced sort of whisper.

"Verboten!" I reminded him. "And not so much the cussing, Peter, as
the useless compliments."

He said nothing to that, but once more
sat staring out over the twilight prairie for quite a long time. When
he spoke again it was in a quieter and much more serious tone.

"I
suppose I may as well tell you," he said without looking at me, "that
I've come into a pretty clear understanding of the situation here
at Alabama Ranch."

"It's kind of a mix-up, isn't it?" I suggested,
with an attempt at lightness.

Peter nodded his head.

"I've been
wondering how long you're going to wait," he observed, apparently
as much to himself as to me.

"Wait for what?" I inquired.

"For what
you call your mix-up to untangle," was his answer.

"There's nothing
for me to do but to wait," I reminded him.

He shook his head in dissent.

"You
can't waste your life, you know, doing that," he quietly protested.

"What
else can I do?" I asked, disturbed a little by the absence of color
from his face, apparent even in that uncertain light.

"Nothing's
suggested itself, I suppose?" he ventured, after a silence.

"Nothing
that prompts me into any immediate action," I told him. "You see,
Peter, I'm rather anchored by three little hostages down in that little
shack there!"

That left him silent for another long and brooding
minute or two.

"I suppose you've wondered," he finally said, "why
I've stuck around here as long as I have?"

I nodded, not caring to
trust myself to words, and then, realizing I was doing the wrong thing,
I shook my head.

"It's because, from the morning you found me in
that mud-hole, I've just wanted to be near you, to hear your voice
when you spoke, to see the curve of your lips and the light come and
go in your eyes when you laugh," were the words that came ever so
slowly from Peter. "I've wanted that so much that I've let about everything
else in life go hang. Yet in a way, and in my own world, I'm a man
of some little importance. I've been cursed with enough money, of
course, to move about as I wish, and loaf as I like. But that sort
of life isn't really living. I'm not in the habit, though, of wanting
the things I can't have. So what strikes me as the tragic part of
it all is that I couldn't have met and known you when you were as
free as I am now. In a way, you are free, or you ought to be. You're
a woman, I think, with arrears of life to make up. You've struck me,
from the very first, as too alive, too sensitive, too responsive to
things, to get the fullest measure out of life by remaining here on
the prairie, in what are, after all, really pioneer conditions. You've
known the other kind of life, as well as I have, and it will always
be calling to you. And if that call means anything to you, and the--the
change we've spoken of is on its way, or for some unexpected reason
has to come, I'm--well, I'm going to take the bit in my teeth right
here and tell you that I love you more than you imagine and a good
deal more, I suppose, than the law allows!"

He pushed my hand aside
when I held it up to stop him.

"I may as well say it, for this is
as good a time and place as we'll ever have, and I can't go around
with my teeth shut on the truth any longer. I know you've got your
three little tots down there, and I love 'em about as much as you
do. And it would seem like giving a little meaning and purpose to
life to know that I had the chance of doing what I could to make you
and to make them happy. I've--"

But I couldn't let him go on.

"It's
no use, Peter," I cried with a little choke in my voice which I couldn't
control. "It's no earthly use. I've known you liked me, and it's given
me a warm little feeling down in one corner of my heart. But I could
never allow it to be more than a corner. I like you, Peter, and I
like you a lot. You're wonderful. In some ways you're the most adorable
man I've ever known in all my life. That's a dangerous thing to say,
but it's the truth and I may as well say it. It even hurts a little
to remember that I've traded on your chivalry, though that's the one
thing in life you can trade on without reproof or demand for repayment.
But as I told you before, I'm one of those neck-or-nothing women,
one of those single-track women, who can't have their tides of traffic
going two ways at once. And if I'm in a mix-up, or a maelstrom, or
whatever you want to call it, I'm in it. That's where I belong. It
would never, never do to drag an innocent outsider into that mixed-up
mess of life, simply because I imagined it could make me a little
more comfortable to have him there."

Peter sat thinking over what
I'd said. There were no heroics, no chest-pounding, no suggestion
of romantically blighted lives and broken hearts.

"That means, of
course, that I'll have to climb out," Peter finally and very prosaically
remarked.

"Why?" I asked.

"Because it's so apt to leave one of us
sailing under false colors," was his somewhat oblique way of explaining
the situation. "I might have hung on until something happened, I suppose,
if I hadn't shown my hand. And I hadn't quite the right to show my
hand, when you take everything into consideration. But you can't always
do what you intend to. And life's a little bigger than deportment,
anyway, so what's the use of fussing over it? There's just one thing,
though, I want to say, before we pull down the shutters again. I want
you to feel that if anything does happen, if by any mischance things
should take a turn for the worse, or you're worried in any way about
the outcome of all this"--he indulged in a quiet but comprehensive
hand-wave which embraced the entire ranch that lay in the gray light
at our feet--"I want you to feel that I'd be mighty happy to think
you'd turn to me for--for help."

It was getting just a little too
serious again, I felt, and I decided in a bit of a panic to pilot
things back to shallower water.

"But you have helped, Peter," I protested.
"Look at all that hay you cut, and the windmill here, and the orange
marmalade that'll make me think of you every morning!"

He leaned
a little closer and regarded me with a quiet and wistful eye. But
I refused to look at him.

"That's nothing to what I'd like to do,
if you gave me the chance," he observed, settling back against the
tower-standard again.

"I know, Peter," I told him, "And it's nice
of you to say it. But the nicest thing of all is your prodigious unselfishness,
the unselfishness that's leaving this talk of ours kind of--well,
kind of hallowed, and something we'll not be unhappy in remembering,
when it could have so easily turned into something selfishly mean
and ugly and sordid. He saw a probability of error in
all the creeds and confessions adopted by Christian Churches. "Such bodies of confessions and
articles," he said, "must do much hurt." "He is rather the schismatic who makes unnecessary
and inconvenient impositions, than he who disobeys them because he cannot do otherwise without
violating his conscience." The Apostles' Creed in its literal meaning seemed to him the one
term of Christian union which the Church had any right to impose.

[Sidenote: Hobbes.]

The impulse which such men were giving to religious speculation was being given to political
and social inquiry by a mind of far greater keenness and power. Bacon's favourite secretary
was Thomas Hobbes. "He was beloved by his Lordship," Aubrey tells us, "who was wont to have
him walk in his delicate groves, where he did meditate; and when a notion darted into his mind,
Mr. Hobbes was presently to write it down. And his Lordship was wont to say that he did it
better than any one else about him; for that many times when he read their notes he scarce
understood what they writ, because they understood it not clearly themselves." The long life
of Hobbes covers a memorable space in our history. He was born in the year of the victory over
the Armada; he died in 1679 at the age of ninety-two, only nine years before the Revolution.
His ability soon made itself felt, and in his earlier days he was the secretary of Bacon, and
the friend of Ben Jonson and Lord Herbert of Cherbury. But it was not till the age of fifty-four,
when he withdrew to France on the eve of the great Rebellion in 1642, that his speculations
were made known to the world in his treatise "De Cive." He joined the exiled Court at Paris,
and became mathematical tutor to Charles the Second, whose love and regard for him seem to
have been real to the end. But his post was soon forfeited by the appearance of his "Leviathan"
in 1651; he was forbidden to approach the Court, and returned to England, where he appears
to have acquiesced in the rule of Cromwell.

[Sidenote: His political speculations.]

The Restoration brought Hobbes a pension; but both his works were condemned by Parliament,
and "Hobbism" became, ere he died, a popular synonym for irreligion and immorality. Prejudice
of this kind sounded oddly in the case of a writer who had laid down, as the two things necessary
to salvation, faith in Christ and obedience to the law. But the prejudice sprang from a true
sense of the effect which the Hobbist philosophy must necessarily have whether on the current
religion or on the current notions of political and social morality. Hobbes was the first great
English writer who dealt with the science of government from the ground, not of tradition,
but of reason. It was in his treatment of man in the stage of human developement which he supposed
to precede that of society that he came most roughly into conflict with the accepted beliefs.
Men, in his theory, were by nature equal, and their only natural relation was a state of war.
It was no innate virtue of man himself which created human society out of this chaos of warring
strengths. Hobbes in fact denied the existence of the more spiritual sides of man's nature.
His hard and narrow logic dissected every human custom and desire, and reduced even the most
sacred to demonstrations of a prudent selfishness. Friendship was simply a sense of social
utility to one another. The so-called laws of nature, such as gratitude or the love of our
neighbour, were in fact contrary to the natural passions of man, and powerless to restrain
them. Nor had religion rescued man by the interposition of a Divine will. Nothing better illustrates
the daring with which the new scepticism was to break through the theological traditions of
the older world than the pitiless logic with which Hobbes assailed the very theory of revelation.
"To say God hath spoken to man in a dream, is no more than to say man dreamed that God hath
spoken to him." "To say one hath seen a vision, or heard a voice, is to say he hath dreamed
between sleeping and waking." Religion, in fact, was nothing more than "the fear of invisible
powers"; and here, as in all other branches of human science, knowledge dealt with words and
not with things.

It was man himself who for his own profit created society, by laying down certain of his natural
rights and retaining only those of self-preservation. The fiction of such an "original contract"
has long been dismissed from political speculation, but its effect at the time of its first
appearance was immense. Its almost universal acceptance put an end to the religious and patriarchal
theories of society, on which kingship had till now founded its claim of a Divine right to
authority which no subject might question. But if Hobbes destroyed the old ground of royal
despotism, he laid a new and a firmer one. To create a society at all, he held that the whole
body of the governed must have resigned all rights save that of self-preservation into the
hands of a single ruler, who was the representative of all. Such a ruler was absolute, for
to make terms with him implied a man making terms with himself. The transfer of rights was
inalienable, and after generations were as much bound by it as the generation which made the
transfer. As the head of the whole body, the ruler judged every question, settled the laws
of civil justice or injustice, or decided between religion and superstition. His was a Divine
Right, and the only Divine Right, because in him were absorbed all the rights of each of his
subjects. It was not in any constitutional check that Hobbes looked for the prevention of tyranny,
but in the common education and enlightenment as to their real end and the best mode of reaching
it on the part of both subjects and Prince. And the real end of both was the weal of the Commonwealth
at large. It was in laying boldly down this end of government, as well as in the basis of contract
on which he made government repose, that Hobbes really influenced all later politics.

[Sidenote: Cromwell's consciousness of failure.]

That Cromwell discerned the strength of such currents of opinion as those which we have described
may fairly be doubted. But he saw that Puritanism had missed its aim. He saw that the attempt
to secure spiritual results by material force had failed, as it always fails. It had broken
down before the indifference and resentment of the great mass of the people, of men who were
neither lawless nor enthusiasts, but who clung to the older traditions of social order, and
whose humour and good sense revolted alike from the artificial conception of human life which
Puritanism had formed, and from its effort to force such a conception on a people by law. It
broke down too before the corruption of the Puritans themselves. It was impossible to distinguish
between the saint and the hypocrite as soon as godliness became profitable. Ashley Cooper,
a sceptic in religion and a profligate in morals, was among "the loudest bagpipes of the squeaking
train." Even amongst the really earnest Puritans prosperity disclosed a pride, a worldliness,
a selfish hardness which had been hidden in the hour of persecution. What was yet more significant
was the irreligious and sceptical temper of the younger generation which had grown up amidst
the storms of the Civil War. The children even of the leading Puritans stood aloof from Puritanism.
The eldest of Cromwell's sons made small pretensions to religion. Milton's nephews, though
reared in his house, were writing satires against Puritan hypocrisy and contributing to collections
of filthy songs. The two daughters of the great preacher, Stephen Marshall, were to figure
as actresses on the infamous stage of the Restoration. The tone of the Protector's later speeches
shows his consciousness that the ground was slipping from under his feet. He no longer dwells
on the dream of a Puritan England, of a nation rising as a whole into a people of God. He falls
back on the phrases of his youth, and the saints become again a "peculiar people," a remnant,
a fragment among the nation at large.

[Sidenote: Dissolution of the Parliament.]

But with the consciousness of failure in realizing his ideal of government the charm of government
was gone; and now to the weariness of power were added the weakness and feverish impatience
of disease. Vigorous and energetic as Cromwell's life had seemed, his health was by no means
as strong as his will; he had been struck down by intermittent fever in the midst of his triumphs
both in Scotland and in Ireland, and during the past year he had suffered from repeated attacks
of it. "I have some infirmities upon me," he owned twice over in his speech at the reopening
of the Parliament in January 1658, after an adjournment of six months; and his feverish irritability
was quickened by the public danger. No supplies had been voted, and the pay of the army was
heavily in arrear, while its temper grew more and more sullen at the appearance of the new
Constitution and the reawakening of the Royalist intrigues. Cromwell had believed that his
military successes would secure compliance with his demands; but the temper of the Commons
was even more irritable than his own. Under the terms of the new Constitution the members excluded
in the preceding year took their places again in the House; and it was soon clear that the
Parliament reflected the general mood of the nation. The tone of the Commons became captious
and quarrelsome. They still delayed the grant of supplies. Meanwhile a hasty act of the Protector
in giving to his nominees in "the other House," as the new second chamber he had devised was
called, the title of "Lords," kindled a strife between the two Houses which was busily fanned
by Haselrig and other opponents of the Government. It was contended that the "other House"
had under the new Constitution simply judicial and not legislative powers. Such a contention
struck at once at Cromwell's work of restoring the old political forms of English life: and
the reappearance of Parliamentary strife threw him at last, says an observer at his court,
"into a rage and passion like unto madness." What gave weight to it was the growing strength
of the Royalist party, and its hopes of a coming rising. Such a rising had in fact been carefully
prepared; and Charles with a large body of Spanish troops drew to the coast of Flanders to
take advantage of it. His hopes were above all encouraged by the strife in the Commons, and
their manifest dislike of the system of the Protectorate. It was this that drove Cromwell to
action. Summoning his coach, by a sudden impulse, the Protector drove on the fourth of February
with a few guards to Westminster; and, setting aside the remonstrances of Fleetwood, summoned
the two Houses to his presence. "I do dissolve this Parliament," he ended a speech of angry
rebuke, "and let God be judge between you and me."

[Sidenote: Death of Cromwell.]

Fatal as was the error, for the moment all went well. The army was reconciled by the blow levelled
at its opponents, and a few murmurers who appeared in its ranks were weeded out by a careful
remodelling. The triumphant officers vowed to stand or fall with his Highness. The danger of
a Royalist rising vanished before a host of addresses from the counties. Great news too came
from abroad, where victory in Flanders, and the cession of Dunkirk in June, set the seal on
Cromwell's glory. But the fever crept steadily on, and his looks told the tale of death to
the Quaker, Fox, who met him riding in Hampton Court Park. "Before I came to him," he says,
"as he rode at the head of his Life Guards, I saw and felt a waft of death go forth against
him, and when I came to him he looked like a dead man." In the midst of his triumph Cromwell's
heart was heavy in fact with the sense of failure. He had no desire to play the tyrant; nor
had he any belief in the permanence of a mere tyranny. He clung desperately to the hope of
bringing over the country to his side. He had hardly dissolved the Parliament before he was
planning the summons of another, and angry at the opposition which his Council offered to the
project. "I will take my own resolutions," he said gloomily to his household; "I can no longer
satisfy myself to sit still, and make myself guilty of the loss of all the honest party and
of the nation itself." But before his plans could be realized the overtaxed strength of the
Protector suddenly gave way. Early in August 1658 his sickness took a more serious form. He
saw too clearly the chaos into which his death would plunge England to be willing to die. "Do
not think I shall die," he burst out with feverish energy to the physicians who gathered round
him; "say not I have lost my reason! I tell you the truth. I know it from better authority
than any you can have from Galen or Hippocrates. It is the answer of God Himself to our prayers!"
Prayer indeed rose from every side for his recovery, but death drew steadily nearer, till even
Cromwell felt that his hour was come. "I would be willing to live," the dying man murmured,
"to be further serviceable to God and His people, but my work is done! Yet God will be with
His people!" A storm which tore roofs from houses, and levelled huge trees in every forest,
seemed a fitting prelude to the passing away of his mighty spirit. Three days later, on the
third of September, the day which had witnessed his victories of Worcester and Dunbar, Cromwell
quietly breathed his last.

[Sidenote: Richard Cromwell, Protector.]

So absolute even in death was his sway over the minds of men, that, to the wonder of the excited
Royalists, even a doubtful nomination on his death-bed was enough to secure the peaceful succession
of his son, Richard Cromwell. Many in fact who had rejected the authority of his father submitted
peaceably to the new Protector. Their motives were explained by Baxter, the most eminent among
the Presbyterian ministers, in an address to Richard which announced his adhesion. "I observe,"
he says, "that the nation generally rejoice in your peaceable entrance upon the government.
The new Protector was a weak and worthless man; but the bulk of the nation were content to
be ruled by one who was at any rate no soldier, no Puritan, and no innovator. Richard was known
to be lax and worldly in his conduct, and he was believed to be conservative and even royalist
in heart. The tide of reaction was felt even in his Council. Their first act was to throw aside
one of the greatest of Cromwell's reforms, and to fall back in the summons which they issued
for a new Parliament on the old system of election. It was felt far more keenly in the tone
of the new House of Commons when it met in January 1659. The republicans under Vane, backed
adroitly by the members who were secretly Royalist, fell hotly on Cromwell's system. The fiercest
attack of all came from Sir Ashley Cooper, a Dorsetshire gentleman who had changed sides in
the Civil War, had fought for the King and then for the Parliament, had been a member of Cromwell's
Council, and had of late ceased to be a member of it. His virulent invective on "his Highness
of deplorable memory, who with fraud and force deprived you of your liberty when living and
entailed slavery on you at his death," was followed by an equally virulent invective against
the army. "They have not only subdued their enemies," said Cooper, "but the masters who raised
and maintained them! They have not only conquered Scotland and Ireland, but rebellious England
too; and there suppressed a Malignant party of magistrates and laws."

[Sidenote: Divisions in the army.]

The army was quick with its reply. Already in the preceding November it had shown its suspicion
of the new government by demanding the appointment of a soldier as General in the place of
the new Protector, who had assumed the command. The tone of the Council of Officers now became
so menacing that the Commons ordered the dismissal of all officers who refused to engage "not
to disturb or interrupt the free meetings of Parliament." Richard ordered the Council of Officers
to dissolve. Their reply was a demand for the dissolution of the Parliament; and with this
demand, on the twenty-second of April, Richard was forced to comply. The purpose of the army
however was still to secure a settled government; and setting aside the new Protector, whose
weakness was now evident, they resolved to come to a reconciliation with the republican party,
and to recall the fragment of the Commons whom they had expelled from St. Stephen's in 1653.
The arrangement was quickly brought about; and in May, of the one hundred and sixty members
who had continued to sit after the king's death, about ninety returned to their seats and resumed
the administration of affairs. The continued exclusion of the members who had been "purged"
from the House in 1648 proved that no real intention existed of restoring a legal rule; and
the soldiers trusted that the Rump whom they had restored to power would be bound to them by
the growing danger both to republicanism and to religious liberty. But not even their passion
for these "causes" could make men endure the rule of the sword. The House was soon at strife
with the soldiers. In spite of Vane's counsels, it proposed a reform of the officers, and though
a Royalist rising in Cheshire during August threw the disputants for a moment together, the
struggle revived as the danger passed away. A new hope indeed filled men's minds. Not only
was the nation sick of military rule, but the army, unconquerable so long as it held together,
at last showed signs of division. In Ireland and Scotland the troops protested against the
attitude of their English comrades; and Monk, the commander of the Scottish army, threatened
to march on London and free the Parliament from their pressure. The knowledge of these divisions
encouraged Haselrig and his coadjutors in the Commons to demand the dismissal of Fleetwood
and Lambert from their commands. They answered in October by driving the Parliament again from
Westminster, and by marching under Lambert to the north to meet the army under Monk.

[Sidenote: Return of Charles.]

Lambert however suffered himself to be lured into inaction by negotiations, while Monk gathered
a Convention at Edinburgh, and strengthened himself with money and recruits. His attitude was
enough to rouse England to action. Portsmouth closed its gates against the delegates of the
soldiers. The fleet declared against them. So rapidly did the tide of feeling rise throughout
the country that the army at the close of December was driven to undo their work by recalling
the Rump. But the concession only aided the force of resistance by showing the weakness of
the tyranny which England was resolute to throw off. Lambert's men fell from him, and finding
his path clear, Monk, without revealing his purport, advanced rapidly to Coldstream, and crossed
the Border in the first days of 1660. His action broke the spell of terror which had weighed
upon the country. The cry of "A free Parliament" ran like fire through the country. Not only
Fairfax, who appeared in arms in Yorkshire, but the ships on the Thames and the mob which thronged
the streets of London caught up the cry. Still steadily advancing, but lavishing protestations
of loyalty to the Rump while he accepted petitions for a "Free Parliament," Monk on the third
of February entered unopposed. From the moment of his entry the restoration of the Stuarts
became inevitable. The army, resolute as it still remained for the maintenance of "the cause,"
was deceived by Monk's declarations of loyalty to it, and rendered powerless by his adroit
dispersion of the troops over the country. At the instigation of Ashley Cooper, those who remained
of the members who had been excluded from the House of Commons in 1648 again forced their way
into Parliament, and at once resolved on a dissolution and the election of a new House of Commons.
The dissolution in March was followed by a last struggle of the army for its old supremacy.
Lambert escaped from the Tower and called his fellow-soldiers to arms; but he was hotly pursued,
overtaken, and routed near Daventry; and on the twenty-fifth of April the new House, which
bears the name of the Convention, assembled at Westminster. It had hardly taken the Solemn
League and Covenant which showed its Presbyterian temper, and its leaders had only begun to
draw up terms on which the king's restoration might be assented to, when they found that Monk
was in negotiation with the exiled Court. The king was at once invited to hasten to his realm;
and on the twenty-fifth of May Charles landed at Dover, and made his way amidst the shouts
of a great multitude to Whitehall. "It is my own fault," laughed the new king with characteristic
irony, "that I had not come back sooner; for I find nobody who does not tell me he has always
longed for my return."

[Sidenote: Fall of Puritanism.]

In his progress to the capital Charles passed in review the soldiers assembled on Blackheath.
Betrayed by their general, abandoned by their leaders, surrounded as they were by a nation
in arms, the gloomy silence of their ranks awed even the careless king with a sense of danger.
But none of the victories of the New Model were so glorious as the victory which it won over
itself. Quietly, and without a struggle, as men who bowed to the inscrutable will of God, the
farmers and traders who had dashed Rupert's chivalry to pieces on Naseby field, who had scattered
at Worcester the "army of the aliens," and driven into helpless flight the sovereign that now
came "to enjoy his own again," who had renewed beyond sea the glories of Crécy and Agincourt,
had mastered the Parliament, had brought a king to justice and the block, had given laws to
England, and held even Cromwell in awe, became farmers and traders again, and were known among
their fellow-men by no other sign than their greater soberness and industry. It was from the
moment of its seeming fall that its real victory began. As soon as the wild orgy of the Restoration
was over, men began to see that nothing that was really worthy in the work of Puritanism had
been undone. The revels of Whitehall, the scepticism and debauchery of courtiers, the corruption
of statesmen, left the mass of Englishmen what Puritanism had made them, serious, earnest,
sober in life and conduct, firm in their love of Protestantism and of freedom. In the Revolution
of 1688 Puritanism did the work of civil liberty which it had failed to do in that of 1642.
It wrought out through Wesley and the revival of the eighteenth century the work of religious
reform which its earlier efforts had only thrown back for a hundred years. Slowly but steadily
it introduced its own seriousness and purity into English society, English literature, English
politics. The history of English progress since the Restoration, on its moral and spiritual
sides, has been the history of Puritanism.

BOOK VIII

THE REVOLUTION

1660-1760

AUTHORITIES FOR BOOK VIII

The social change of the Restoration is illustrated by the picture of court life in Anthony
Hamilton's "Memoirs of the Count de Grammont," by the memoirs of Reresby, Pepys, and Evelyn,
and the dramatic works of Wycherly and Etherege. For the general character of its comedy see
Lord Macaulay's "Essay on the Dramatists of the Restoration." The histories of the Royal Society
by Thompson or Wade, with Sir D. Brewster's "Biography of Newton," preserve the earlier annals
of English Science, which are condensed by Hallam in his "Literary History" (vol. iv.). Clarendon
gives a detailed account of his own ministry in his "Life," which forms a continuation of his
"History of the Rebellion." The relations of the Church and the Dissenters during this period
may be seen in Neal's "History of the Puritans," Calamy's "Memoirs of the Ejected Ministers,"
Mr. Dixon's "Life of Penn," Baxter's "Autobiography," and Bunyan's account of his sufferings
in his various works. For the political story of the period as a whole our best authorities
are Bishop Kennet's "Register," and Burnet's lively "History of my own Times." The memoirs
of Sir W. Temple, with his correspondence, are of great value up to their close in 1679. Mr.
Christie's "Life of Shaftesbury" is a defence, and in some ways a successful defence, of that
statesman's career and of the Whig policy at this time, which may be studied also in Earl Russell's
life of his ancestor, William, Lord Russell. To these we may add the fragments of James the
Second's autobiography preserved in Macpherson's "Original Papers" (of very various degrees
of value), the "Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland" by Dalrymple, the first to discover the
real secret of the negotiations with France, M. Mignet's "Négociations relatives à la Succession
d'Espagne," a work indispensable for a knowledge of foreign affairs during this period, Welwood's
"Memoirs," and Luttrell's "Diary."

Throughout the whole reign of Charles the Second Hallam's "Constitutional History" is singularly
judicious and full in its information. Lingard becomes of importance during this period from
the original materials to which he has had access, as well as from his clear and dispassionate
statement of the Catholic side of the question. Ranke in his "History of the Seventeenth Century"
has thrown great light on the diplomatic history of the later Stuart reigns: on internal and
constitutional points he is cool and dispassionate but of less value. The great work of Lord
Macaulay, which practically ends at the Peace of Ryswick, is continued by Lord Stanhope in
his "History of England under Queen Anne," and his "History of England from the Peace of Utrecht."
For Marlborough the main authority must be the Duke's biography by Archdeacon Coxe with his
"Despatches." The character of the Tory opposition may be studied in Swift's Journal to Stella
and his political tracts, as well as in Bolingbroke's correspondence. The French side of the
war and negotiations has been given by M. Henri Martin ("Histoire de France") in what is the
most accurate and judicious portion of his work. For the earlier period of the Georges Coxe's
"Life of Sir Robert Walpole," Horace Walpole's "Memoirs of the Reign of George the Second,"
and Lord Hervey's amusing "Memoirs from the Accession of George the Second to the Death of
Queen Caroline," give the main materials on the one side; Bolingbroke's "Patriot King," his
"Letter to Sir W. Wyndham," and his correspondence afford some insight into the other. Horace
Walpole's "Letters to Sir Horace Mann" give a minute account of his father's fall.

For the elder Pitt we have the Chatham Correspondence, a life by Thackeray, and two brilliant
Essays by Lord Macaulay. Another of Lord Macaulay's Essays may be used with Sir John Malcolm's
biography for the life of Lord Clive and the early history of British India, a fuller account
of which may of course be found in general histories of India, such as that by James Mill.
Carlyle's Frederick the Great contains a picturesque recital of the Seven Years War, and of
England's share in it; while the earlier relations of England and Frederick may be studied
more coolly and thoroughly in Ranke's "Nine Books of Prussian History," published in an English
version under the name of his "History of Prussia." The earlier part of the "Annual Register,"
which begins in 1758, has been attributed to Burke. Southey's biography, or the more elaborate
life by Tyerman, gives an account of Wesley and the movement he headed.

CHAPTER I

THE RESTORATION

1660-1667

[Sidenote: The New England.]

The entry of Charles the Second into Whitehall marked a deep and lasting change in the temper
of the English people. With it modern England began. The influences which had up to this time
moulded our history, the theological influence of the Reformation, the monarchical influence
of the new kingship, the feudal influence of the Middle Ages, the yet earlier influence of
tradition and custom, suddenly lost power over the minds of men. From the moment of the Restoration
we find ourselves all at once among the great currents of thought and activity which have gone
on widening and deepening from that time to this. The England around us becomes our own England,
an England whose chief forces are industry and science, the love of popular freedom and of
law, an England which presses steadily forward to a larger social justice and equality, and
which tends more and more to bring every custom and tradition, religious, intellectual, and
political, to the test of pure reason.

Between modern thought, on some at least of its more important sides, and the thought of men
before the Restoration there is a great gulf fixed. A political thinker in the present day
would find it equally hard to discuss any point of statesmanship with Lord Burleigh or with
Oliver Cromwell. He would find no point of contact between their ideas of national life or
national welfare, their conception of government or the ends of government, their mode of regarding
economical and social questions, and his own. But no gulf of this sort parts us from the men
who followed the Restoration. From that time to this, whatever differences there may have been
as to the practical conclusions drawn from them, there has been a substantial agreement as
to the grounds of our political, our social, our intellectual, and religious life. Paley would
have found no difficulty in understanding Tillotson. Newton and Sir Humphry Davy could have
talked together without a sense of severance. There would have been nothing to hinder a perfectly
clear discussion on government or law between John Locke and Jeremy Bentham.

[Sidenote: The Social Revolt.]

The change from the old England to the new is so startling that we are apt to look on it as
a more sudden change than it really was; and the outer aspect of the Restoration does much
to strengthen this impression of suddenness. The whole face of England was changed in an instant.
All that was noblest and best in Puritanism was whirled away with its pettiness and its tyranny
in the current of the nation's hate. Religion had been turned into a system of political and
social oppression, and it fell with that system's fall. Godliness became a byword of scorn;
sobriety in dress, in speech, in manners was flouted as a mark of the detested Puritanism.
Butler in his "Hudibras" poured insult on the past with a pedantic buffoonery for which the
general hatred, far more than its humour, secured a hearing. Archbishop Sheldon listened to
the mock sermon of a Cavalier who held up the Puritan phrase and the Puritan twang to ridicule
in his hall at Lambeth. Duelling and raking became the marks of a fine gentleman; and grave
divines winked at the follies of "honest fellows" who fought, gambled, swore, drank, and ended
a day of debauchery by a night in the gutter. Life among men of fashion vibrated between frivolity
and excess. One of the comedies of the time tells the courtier that "he must dress well, dance
well, fence well, have a talent for love-letters, an agreeable voice, be amorous and discreet--but
not too constant." To graces such as these the rakes of the Restoration added a shamelessness
and a brutality which passes belief. The Duke of Buckingham is a fair type of the time, and
the most characteristic event in the Duke's life was a duel in which he consummated his seduction
of Lady Shrewsbury by killing her husband, while the Countess in disguise as a page held his
horse for him and looked on at the murder.

[Sidenote: The Comedy of the Restoration.]

Vicious as the stage was when it opened its doors again on the fall of the Commonwealth it
only reflected the general vice of the day. The Comedy of the Restoration borrowed everything
from the contemporary Comedy of France save the poetry, the delicacy, and good taste which
there veiled its grossness. Seduction, intrigue, brutality, cynicism, debauchery, found fitting
expression on the English stage in dialogue of a studied and deliberate foulness, which even
its wit fails to redeem from disgust. Wycherly, the popular playwright of the time, remains
the most brutal among all dramatists; and nothing gives so damning an impression of his day
as the fact that he found actors to repeat his words and audiences to applaud them. Men such
as Wycherly gave Milton models for the Belial of his great poem, "than whom a spirit more lewd
fell not from heaven, or more gross to love vice for itself." The dramatist piques himself
on the frankness and "plain dealing" which painted the world as he saw it, a world of brawls
and assignations, of orgies at Vauxhall and fights with the watch, of lies and doubles-ententes,
of knaves and dupes, of men who sold their daughters, and women who cheated their husbands.
But the cynicism of Wycherly was no greater than that of the men about him; and in mere love
of what was vile, in contempt of virtue and disbelief in purity or honesty, the king himself
stood ahead of any of his subjects.

[Sidenote: The New Rationalism.]

It is easy however to exaggerate the extent of this reaction. So far as we can judge from the
memoirs of the time its more violent forms were practically confined to the capital and the
court. The mass of Englishmen were satisfied with getting back their Maypoles and mince-pies;
and a large part of the people remained Puritan in life and belief though they threw aside
many of the outer characteristics of Puritanism. Nor was the revolution in feeling as sudden
as it seemed. Even if the political strength of Puritanism had remained unbroken its social
influence must soon have ceased. The young Englishmen who grew up in the midst of civil war
knew nothing of the bitter tyranny which gave its zeal and fire to the religion of their fathers.
From the social and religious anarchy around them, from the endless controversies and discussions
of the time, they drank in the spirit of scepticism, of doubt, of free inquiry. If religious
enthusiasm had broken the spell of ecclesiastical tradition its own extravagance broke the
spell of religious enthusiasm; and the new generation turned in disgust to try forms of political
government and spiritual belief by the cooler and less fallible test of reason.

It is this rationalizing tendency of the popular mind, this indifference to the traditions
and ideals of the past, this practical and experimental temper, which found its highest expression
in the sudden popularity of the pursuit of physical science. Of the two little companies of
inquirers whom we have already noticed as gathering at the close of the Civil War, that which
remained in the capital and had at last been broken up by the troubles of the Second Protectorate
was revived at the Restoration by the return to London of the more eminent members of the group
which had assembled at Oxford. But the little company of philosophers had hardly begun their
meetings at Gresham College when they found themselves objects of a general interest. Science
suddenly became the fashion of the day. Charles the Second was himself a fair chymist, and
took a keen interest in the problems of navigation. The Duke of Buckingham varied his freaks
of rhyming, drinking, and fiddling by fits of devotion to his laboratory. Poets like Dryden
and Cowley, courtiers like Sir Robert Murray and Sir Kenelm Digby, joined the scientific company
to which in token of his sympathy with it the king gave the title of "The Royal Society." The
curious glass toys called Prince Rupert's drops recall the scientific inquiries which amused
the old age of the great cavalry-leader of the Civil War. Wits and fops crowded to the meetings
of the new Society. Statesmen like Lord Somers felt honoured at being chosen its presidents.

[Sidenote: English Science.]

The definite establishment of the Royal Society in 1662 marks the opening of a great age of
scientific discovery in England. Almost every year of the half-century which followed saw some
step made to a wider and truer knowledge of physical fact. Our first national observatory rose
at Greenwich, and modern astronomy began with the long series of observations which immortalized
the name of Flamsteed. His successor, Halley, undertook the investigation of the tides, of
comets, and of terrestrial magnetism. Hooke improved the microscope and gave a fresh impulse
to microscopical research. Boyle made the air-pump a means of advancing the science of pneumatics,
and became the founder of experimental chymistry. Wilkins pointed forward to the science of
philology in his scheme of a universal language. Sydenham introduced a careful observation
of nature and facts which changed the whole face of medicine. The physiological researches
of Willis first threw light upon the structure of the brain. Woodward was the founder of mineralogy.
In his edition of Willoughby's "Ornithology," and in his own "History of Fishes," John Ray
was the first to raise zoology to the rank of a science; and the first scientific classification
of animals was attempted in his "Synopsis of Quadrupeds." Modern botany began with Ray's "History
of Plants," and the researches of an Oxford professor, Robert Morrison; while Grew divided
with Malpighi the credit of founding the study of vegetable physiology.

But great as some of these names undoubtedly are they are lost in the lustre of Isaac Newton.
Newton was born at Woolsthorpe in Lincolnshire on Christmas Day, 1642, the memorable year which
saw the outbreak of the Civil War. From the close of his Cambridge career his life became a
series of great physical discoveries. At twenty-three he facilitated the calculation of planetary
movements by his theory of Fluxions. The optical discoveries to which he was led by his experiments
with the prism, and which he partly disclosed in the lectures which he delivered as Mathematical
Professor at Cambridge, were embodied in the theory of light which he laid before the Royal
Society on becoming a Fellow of it. His discovery of the law of gravitation had been made as
early as 1666; but the erroneous estimate which was then generally received of the earth's
diameter prevented him from disclosing it for sixteen years; and it was not till 1687, on the
eve of the Revolution, that the "Principia" revealed to the world his new theory of the Universe.

[Sidenote: The Latitudinarian Theology.]

It is impossible to do more than indicate in such a summary as we have given the wonderful
activity of directly scientific thought which distinguished the age of the Restoration. But
the sceptical and experimental temper of mind which this activity disclosed was telling at
the same time upon every phase of the world around it. We see the attempt to bring religious
speculation into harmony with the conclusions of reason and experience in the school of Latitudinarian
theologians which sprang from the group of thinkers that gathered on the eve of the Civil War
round Lord Falkland at Great Tew. With the Restoration the Latitudinarians came at once to
the front. They were soon distinguished from both Puritans and High Churchmen by their opposition
to dogma, by their preference of reason to tradition whether of the Bible or the Church, by
their basing religion on a natural theology, by their aiming at rightness of life rather than
at correctness of opinion, by their advocacy of toleration and comprehension as the grounds
of Christian unity. Chillingworth and Taylor found successors in the restless good sense of
Burnet, the enlightened piety of Tillotson, and the calm philosophy of Bishop Butler. From
this moment indeed the work of English theologians turned from the bold assertion of the supremacy
of revealed truth over natural reason to a more cautious assertion of the essential harmony
of the one with the other. Boyle varied his philosophical experiments by demonstrations of
the unity of dogmatic and natural religion. So moderate and philosophical was the temper displayed
by Cudworth in his "Intellectual System of the Universe," that the bigots of his day charged
him with the atheistic principles which he was endeavouring to refute. But the change of tone
in the theologians of the Reformation was itself an indication of the new difficulties which
theology had to meet. The bold scepticism of Hobbes was adopted by courtiers and politicians.
Charles himself was divided between superstition and Hobbism. Shaftesbury was a Deist. The
bulk of the leading statesmen of the time looked on religious questions in a purely political
light.

[Sidenote: Political Philosophy.]

The impulse which was carrying religious speculation into regions hitherto strange to it told
equally on political and social inquiry. The researches of Sir Josiah Child, and still more
of Sir William Petty, not only threw light on the actual state of English trade but pointed
forward to the future science of Political Economy. For the moment however philosophical speculation
on the nature of government eclipsed the interest of statistical research. But in spite of
the bitter resistance offered to it his assertion of a rational method of political inquiry
superseded more and more the older doctrines of a religious and traditional polity. After Clarendon
no English statesman really believed in any divine right of the sovereign he served; and Charles
himself probably believed it still less than his ministers. The fiction of a contract between
governor and governed, on which Hobbes built up his theory of a state, passed silently into
general acceptance. John Locke, the foremost political thinker of the Restoration, derived
political authority like Hobbes from the consent of the governed, and adopted the common weal
as the end of government. But the practical temper of the time moulded the new theory into
a form which contrasted strangely with that given to it by its first inventor. The political
philosophy of Locke indeed was little more than a formal statement of the conclusions which
the bulk of Englishmen had drawn from the great struggle of the Civil War. In his theory the
people remain passively in possession of the power which they have delegated to the Prince,
and have the right to withdraw it if it be used for purposes inconsistent with the end which
society was formed to promote. To the origin of all power in the people, and the end of all
power for the people's good--the two great doctrines of Hobbes--Locke added the right of resistance,
the responsibility of princes to their subjects for a due execution of their trust, and the
supremacy of legislative assemblies as expressing the voice of the people itself.

It was in this modified and enlarged form that the new political philosophy found general acceptance
after the Revolution of 1688. But powerful as was its influence in the thirty years which separated
that event from the Restoration it remained during that period an influence which told but
slowly on the people at large. It is indeed this severance for the time between the thinking
classes and the general bulk of the nation which makes its history so difficult and perplexing.
While sceptics and divines were drifting to questions which involved the very being of religion
itself the mass of Englishmen were still without a doubt, and dead to every religious struggle
save the old struggle of Protestantism with the Pope. While statesmen and philosophers were
smiling at Sir Robert Firmer and his "Patriarchal Theory of Government," the people remained
blind to any notion of an original contract, and every pulpit resounded with the doctrine of
a divine right of kings. It was only by slow steps, and above all by the practical stress of
events, that England was driven forward to religious toleration or to the establishment of
parliamentary government in the place of monarchy.

[Sidenote: The Period of Transition.]

Slowly and gradually however it was driven forward to both. Even at the outset of the Restoration
the temper of England had in fact drifted far from the past to which it thought to return.
The work of the Long Parliament indeed seemed to be undone when Charles entered Whitehall.
Not only was the Monarchy restored but it was restored without restriction or condition; and
of the two great influences which had hitherto served as checks on its power, the first, that
of Puritanism, had become hateful to the nation at large, while the second, the tradition of
constitutional liberty, was discredited by the issue of the Civil War. But, wild as was the
tumult of demonstrative loyalty, not one of the great steps towards constitutional freedom
which had been gained by the patriots of 1641 was really lost. The prerogatives for which Charles
the First had struggled were quietly relinquished by his son. The very Cavaliers who had welcomed
the king to "his own again" never dreamt of restoring the system of government which their
opponents had overthrown. Twenty years of parliamentary rule, however broken and mixed with
political and religious tyranny, had made the return to ship-money or monopolies or the Star
Chamber impossible. Men had become so accustomed to freedom that they forgot how recent a thing
its unquestioned existence was. From the first therefore the great "revolution of the seventeenth
century," as it has been called, went steadily on. The supreme power was gradually transferred
from the Crown to the House of Commons. Step by step Parliament drew nearer to a solution of
the political problem which had so long foiled its efforts, the problem how to make its will
the law of administrative action without itself undertaking the task of administration. It
is only by carefully fixing our eyes on this transfer of power, and by noting the successive
steps towards its realization, that we can understand the complex history of the Restoration
and the Revolution.

[Sidenote: Charles the Second.]

Changed to the very core, yet hardly conscious of the change, drifting indeed steadily towards
a wider knowledge and a firmer freedom, but still a mere medley of Puritan morality and social
revolt, of traditional loyalty and political scepticism, of bigotry and free inquiry, of science
and Popish plots, the England of the Restoration was reflected in its king. What his subjects
saw in Charles the Second was a pleasant, brown-faced gentleman playing with his spaniels,
or drawing caricatures of his ministers, or flinging cakes to the water-fowl in the park. To
all outer seeming Charles was the most consummate of idlers. "He delighted," says one of his
courtiers, "in a bewitching kind of pleasure called sauntering." The business-like Pepys discovered,
as he brought his work to the Council-board, that "the king do mind nothing but pleasures,
and hates the very sight or thoughts of business." That Charles had great natural parts no
one doubted. In his earlier days of defeat and danger he showed a cool courage and presence
of mind which never failed him in the many perilous moments of his reign. His temper was pleasant
and social, his manners perfect, and there was a careless freedom and courtesy in his address
which won over everybody who came into his presence. His education indeed had been so grossly
neglected that he could hardly read a plain Latin book; but his natural quickness and intelligence
showed itself in his pursuit of chymistry and anatomy, and in the interest he showed in the
scientific inquiries of the Royal Society. Like Peter the Great his favourite study was that
of naval architecture, and he piqued himself on being a clever shipbuilder. He had some little
love too for art and poetry, and a taste for music. But his shrewdness and vivacity showed
themselves most in his endless talk. He was fond of telling stories, and he told them with
a good deal of grace and humour. He held his own fairly with the wits of his Court, and bandied
repartees on equal terms with Sedley or Buckingham. Even Rochester in his merciless epigram
was forced to own that Charles "never said a foolish thing." He had inherited in fact his grandfather's
gift of pithy sayings, and his habitual irony often gave an amusing turn to them. When his
brother, the most unpopular man in England, solemnly warned him of plots against his life,
Charles laughingly bade him set all fear aside. "They will never kill me, James," he said,
"to make you king."

But courage and wit and ability seemed to have been bestowed on Charles in vain. He only laughed
when Tom Killigrew told him frankly that badly as things were going on there was one man whose
industry could set them right, "and this is one Charles Stuart, who now spends his time in
using his lips about the Court and hath no other employment." Charles made no secret in fact
of his hatred of business. Nor did he give to outer observers any sign of ambition. The one
thing he seemed in earnest about was sensual pleasure, and he took his pleasure with a cynical
shamelessness which roused the disgust even of his shameless courtiers. Mistress followed mistress,
and the guilt of a troop of profligate women was blazoned to the world by the gift of titles
and estates. The royal bastards were set amongst English nobles. The ducal house of Grafton
springs from the king's adultery with Barbara Palmer, whom he created Duchess of Cleveland.
The Dukes of St. Albans owe their origin to his intrigue with Nell Gwynn, a player and a courtezan.
Louise de Quérouaille, a mistress sent by France to win him to its interests, became Duchess
of Portsmouth and ancestress of the house of Richmond. An earlier mistress, Lucy Walters, declared
him, it is believed falsely, father of the boy whom he raised to the dukedom of Monmouth, and
to whom the Dukes of Buccleuch trace their line. But Charles was far from being content with
these recognized mistresses or with a single form of self-indulgence. Gambling and drinking
helped to fill up the vacant moments when he could no longer toy with his favourites or bet
at Newmarket. No thought of remorse or of shame seems ever to have crossed his mind. "He could
not think God would make a man miserable," he said once, "only for taking a little pleasure
out of the way." From shame he was shielded by his cynical disbelief in human virtue. Virtue
indeed he regarded simply as a trick by which clever hypocrites imposed upon fools. Honour
among men seemed to him as mere a pretence as chastity among women. Gratitude he had none,
for he looked upon self-interest as the only motive of men's actions, and though soldiers had
died and women had risked their lives for him, "he loved others as little as he thought they
loved him." But if he felt no gratitude for benefits he felt no resentment for wrongs. He was
incapable either of love or of hate. The only feeling he retained for his fellow-men was that
of an amused contempt.

It was difficult for Englishmen to believe that any real danger to liberty could come from
an idler and a voluptuary such as Charles the Second. But in the very difficulty of believing
this lay half the king's strength. He had in fact no taste whatever for the despotism of the
Stuarts who had gone before him. His shrewdness laughed his grandfather's theories of Divine
Right down the wind, while his indolence made such a personal administration as that which
his father delighted in burthensome to him. He was too humorous a man to care for the pomp
and show of power, and too good-natured a man to play the tyrant. But he believed as firmly
as his father or his grandfather had believed in his right to a full possession of the older
prerogatives of the Crown. He looked on Parliaments as they had looked on them with suspicion
and jealousy. He clung as they had clung to the dream of a dispensing power over the execution
of the laws. He regarded ecclesiastical affairs as lying within his own personal control, and
viewed the interference of the two Houses with church matters as a sheer usurpation. Above
all he detested the notion of ministerial responsibility to any but the king, or of a Parliamentary
right to interfere in any way with the actual administration of public affairs. "He told Lord
Essex," Burnet says, "that he did not wish to be like a Grand Signior, with some mutes about
him, and bags of bowstrings to strangle men; but he did not think he was a king so long as
a company of fellows were looking into his actions, and examining his ministers as well as
his accounts." "A king," he thought, "who might be checked, and have his ministers called to
an account, was but a king in name."

[Sidenote: The king's Policy.]

In other words Charles had no settled plan of tyranny, but he meant to rule as independently
as he could, and from the beginning to the end of his reign there never was a moment when he
was not doing something to carry out his aim. But he carried it out in a tentative, irregular
fashion which it was as hard to detect as to meet. Whenever there was any strong opposition
he gave way. If popular feeling demanded the dismissal of his ministers, he dismissed them.
If it protested against his declaration of religious indulgence, he recalled it. If it cried
for victims in the frenzy of the Popish Plot, he gave it victims till the frenzy was at an
end. It was easy for Charles to yield and to wait, and just as easy for him to take up the
thread of his purpose afresh the moment the pressure was over. There was one fixed resolve
in fact which overrode every other thought in the king's mind, and this was a resolve "not
to set out on his travels again." His father had fallen through a quarrel with the two Houses,
and Charles was determined to remain on good terms with the Parliament till he was strong enough
to pick a quarrel to his profit. At no time has party strife raged more fiercely; in no reign
has the temper of the Parliament been more threatening to the Crown. But the cynicism of Charles
enabled him to ride out storms which would have wrecked a better and a nobler king. He treated
the Lords with an easy familiarity which robbed opposition of its seriousness. "Their debates
amused him," he said in his indolent way; and he stood chatting before the fire while peer
after peer poured invectives on his ministers, and laughed louder than the rest when Shaftesbury
directed his coarsest taunts at the barrenness of the queen. Courtiers were entrusted with
the secret "management" of the Commons; obstinate country gentlemen were brought to the Royal
closet to kiss the king's hand and listen to the king's pleasant stories of his escape after
Worcester; and still more obstinate country gentlemen were bribed. Where bribes, flattery,
and management failed Charles was content to yield and to wait till his time came again.

[Sidenote: Dissolution of the Union.]

But even while yielding and waiting he never lost sight of the aim he had set himself. If he
had no mind to play the tyrant, he was resolved to be something more than "a king in name."
If he could not get back all that his father had had he could go on patiently gathering up
what fragments of the old royal power still survived, and availing himself of whatever new
resources offered themselves. One means of recovering somewhat of the older authority of the
Crown lay in the simple refusal to recognize the union of the three kingdoms. If he could not
undo what the Puritans had done in England Charles could undo their work in Scotland and in
Ireland. Before the Civil War these kingdoms had served as useful checks on English liberty,
and by simply regarding the Union which the Long Parliament and the Protector had brought about
as a nullity in law it was possible they might become checks again. In his refusal to recognize
the Union Charles was supported by public opinion among his English subjects, partly from sheer
abhorrence of changes wrought during "the troubles," and partly from a dread that the Scotch
and Irish members would form a party in the English Parliament which would always be at the
service of the Crown. In both the lesser kingdoms too a measure which seemed to restore somewhat
of their national independence was for the moment popular.

[Sidenote: Scotland and Ireland.]

But the results of this step were quick in developing themselves. In Scotland the Covenant
was at once abolished. The Scotch Parliament which assembled at Edinburgh, the Drunken Parliament
as it was called, outdid the wildest loyalty of the English Cavaliers by annulling in a single
Act all the proceedings of its predecessors during the last eight-and-twenty years. By this
measure the whole existing Church system of Scotland was deprived of legal sanction. The General
Assembly had already been prohibited from meeting by Cromwell; the kirk-sessions' and ministers'
synods were now suspended. The Scotch bishops were again restored to their spiritual pre-eminence
and to their seats in Parliament. An iniquitous trial sent the Marquis of Argyle, the only
noble strong enough to oppose the Royal will, to the block; and the government was entrusted
to a knot of profligate statesmen till it fell into the hands of Lauderdale, one of the ablest
and most unscrupulous of the king's ministers. Their policy was steadily directed to two purposes,
the first, that of humbling Presbyterianism--as the force which could alone restore Scotland
to freedom and enable her to lend aid as before to English liberty in any struggle with the
Crown--the second, that of raising a royal army which might be ready in case of need to march
over the Border to the king's support. In Ireland the dissolution of the Union brought back
the bishops to their sees; but whatever wish Charles may have had to restore the balance of
Catholic and Protestant as a source of power to the Crown was baffled by the obstinate resistance
of the Protestant settlers to any plans for redressing the confiscations of Cromwell. Five
years of bitter struggle between the dispossessed loyalists and the new occupants left the
Protestant ascendency unimpaired; and in spite of a nominal surrender of one-third of the confiscated
estates to their old possessors hardly a sixth of the profitable land in the island remained
in Catholic holding. The claims of the Duke of Ormond too made it necessary to leave the government
in his hands, and Ormond's loyalty was too moderate and constitutional to lend itself to any
of the schemes of absolute rule which played so great a part in the next reign under Tyrconnell.

[Sidenote: The Royal Army.]

But the severance of the two kingdoms from England was in itself a gain to the Royal authority;
and Charles turned quietly to the building up of a royal army at home. A standing army had
become so hateful a thing to the body of the nation, and above all to the Royalists whom the
New Model had trodden under foot, that it was impossible to propose its establishment. But
in the mind of both Charles and his brother James, the Duke of York, their father's downfall
had been owing to the want of a disciplined force which would have trampled out the first efforts
of national resistance; and while disbanding the New Model Charles availed himself of the alarm
created by a mad rising of some Fifth-Monarchy men in London under an old soldier called Venner
to retain five thousand horse and foot in his service under the name of his guards. A body
of "gentlemen of quality and veteran soldiers, excellently clad, mounted, and ordered," was
thus kept ready for service near the royal person; and in spite of the scandal which it aroused
the king persisted, steadily but cautiously, in gradually increasing its numbers. Twenty years
later it had grown to a force of seven thousand foot and one thousand seven hundred horse and
dragoons at home, with a reserve of six fine regiments abroad in the service of the United
Provinces.

[Sidenote: Charles and English Politics.]

But it was rather on policy than on open force that Charles counted for success. His position
indeed was a strange and perplexing one. All the outer pomp of the monarchy had returned with
the restoration. Charles, like his father, was served by the highest nobles on their knees.
Nor had the theory of his position in appearance changed. The principle indeed of hereditary
kingship had gained a new strength from the troubles of the last twenty years. The fall of
the monarchy had been followed so closely by that of the other institutions, political and
religious, of the realm, its restoration coincided so exactly with their revival, that the
Crown had become the symbol of that national tradition, that historical continuity, without
which the practical sense of Englishmen felt then, as Burke felt afterwards, that men were
"but as flies in a summer." How profound a disgust the violent interruption of this continuous
progress by the clean sweep of the Civil War had left behind it was seen in the indifference
with which measures such as the union of the three kingdoms or the reform of parliamentary
representation were set aside as sharing in the general vice of the time from which they sprang.
It was seen as vividly at even a later time in the instant ruin of Shaftesbury's popularity
from the moment when he was believed to be plotting the renewal of civil war. But if the Monarchy
was strengthened by its association with the tradition of constitutional freedom it was henceforth
inseparably bound to the freedom which strengthened it. The Cavalier who had shouted for the
king's return had shouted also for the return of a free Parliament. The very Chief-Justice
who asserted at the trial of the Regicides the personal freedom of the king from any responsibility
to the nation asserted just as strongly that doctrine of ministerial responsibility against
which Charles the First had struggled. "The law in all cases preserves the person of the king
to be authorized," said Sir Orlando Bridgeman, "but what is done by his ministers unlawfully,
there is a remedy against his ministers for it." It was the desire of every Royalist to blot
out the very memory of the troubles in which monarchy and freedom had alike disappeared, to
take up again as if it had never been broken the thread of our political history. But the point
at which even Royalists took it up was not at the moment of the Tyranny, but at the moment
of the Long Parliament's first triumph when that tyranny had been utterly undone. In his wish
to revive those older claims of the Crown which the Long Parliament had for ever set aside
the young king found himself alone. His closest adherents, his warmest friends, were constitutional
Royalists of the temper of Falkland or Colepepper; partizans of an absolute monarchy, of such
a monarchy as his grandfather had dreamed of and his father for a few years carried into practice,
there now were none.

[Sidenote: Charles and English Religion.]

In his political aims therefore Charles could look for no help within his realm. Nor did he
stand less alone in his religious aims. In heart, whether the story of his renunciation of
Protestantism during his exile be true or no, he had long ceased to be a Protestant. Whatever
religious feeling he had was on the side of Catholicism; he encouraged conversions among his
courtiers, and the last act of his life was to seek formal admission into the Roman Church.
But his feelings were rather political than religious. The English Roman Catholics formed a
far larger part of the population then than now, and their wealth and local influence gave
them a political importance which they have long since lost. The Stuarts had taught them to
look to the Crown for protection against the Protestant bigotry around them, and they repaid
this shelter by aiding Charles the First in his war on the Parliament, and by liberally supplying
his son with money during his exile. He had promised in return to procure toleration for their
worship, and every motive of gratitude as well as self-interest led him to redeem his pledge.
But he was already looking, however vaguely, to something more than Catholic toleration. He
saw that despotism in the State could hardly co-exist with free inquiry and free action in
matters of the conscience; and that government, in his own words, "was a safer and easier thing
where the authority was believed infallible, and the faith and submission of the people were
implicit." The difficulties in the way of such a religious change probably seemed the less
to him from his long residence in Roman Catholic countries and from his own religious scepticism.
Two years indeed after his restoration he had already despatched an agent to Rome to arrange
the terms of a reconciliation between the Anglican Church and the Papacy. But though he counted
much for the success of his project of toleration on taking advantage of the dissensions between
Protestant Churchmen and Protestant Dissenters, he soon discovered that in this or any wider
religious project he stood utterly alone. Clarendon and the Cavaliers were as bitterly anti-Catholic
as the wildest fanatic in his realm. For any real success in his religious as in his political
aims he must look elsewhere than at home.

[Sidenote: State of Europe.]

Holland had been the first power to offer him its aid in the renewal of the old defensive alliance
which had united the two countries before the Civil War, and it had accompanied its offer by
hints of a heavy subsidy. But offers and hints were alike withdrawn when it was found that
the new government persisted in enforcing the Navigation Act which the Long Parliament had
passed. Spain, to which Charles looked with greater hope, demanded terms of alliance which
were impossible--the restoration of Jamaica and the cession of Dunkirk. One ally only remained.
At this moment France was the dominant power in Christendom. The religious wars which began
with the Reformation had broken the strength of the nations around her. Spain was no longer
able to fight the battle of Catholicism. The Peace of Westphalia, by the independence it gave
to the German princes and the jealousy it kept alive between the Protestant and Catholic powers
of Germany, destroyed the strength of the Empire. The German branch of the House of Austria,
spent with the long struggle of the Thirty Years War, had enough to do in battling hard against
the advance of the Turks from Hungary on Vienna. The victories of Gustavus and of the generals
whom he formed had been dearly purchased by the exhaustion of Sweden. The United Provinces
were as yet hardly regarded as a great power, and were trammelled by their contest with England
for the empire of the seas.

[Sidenote: France.]

France alone profited by the general wreck. The wisdom of Henry the Fourth in securing religious
peace by a grant of toleration to the Protestants had undone the ill effects of its religious
wars. The Huguenots were still numerous south of the Loire, but the loss of their fortresses
had turned their energies into the peaceful channels of industry and trade. Feudal disorder
was roughly put down by Richelieu; and the policy which gathered all local power into the hands
of the Crown, though fatal in the end to the real welfare of France, gave it for the moment
an air of good government and a command over its internal resources which no other country
could boast. Its compact and fertile territory, the natural activity and enterprise of its
people, and the rapid growth of its commerce and manufactures, were sources of natural wealth
which even its heavy taxation failed to check. In the latter half of the seventeenth century
France was looked upon as the wealthiest power in Europe. The yearly income of the French crown
was double that of England, and even Lewis the Fourteenth trusted as much to the credit of
his treasury as to the triumphs of his arms. "After all," he said, when the fortunes of war
began to turn against him, "it is the last louis d'or which must win!"

It was in fact this superiority in wealth which enabled France to set on foot forces such as
had never been seen in Europe since the downfall of Rome. At the opening of the reign of Lewis
the Fourteenth its army mustered a hundred thousand men. With the war against Holland it rose
to nearly two hundred thousand. In the last struggle against the Grand Alliance there was a
time when it counted nearly half-a-million of men in arms. Nor was France content with these
enormous land forces. Since the ruin of Spain the fleets of Holland and of England had alone
disputed the empire of the seas. Under Richelieu and Mazarin France could hardly be looked
upon as a naval power. But the early years of Lewis saw the creation of a navy of a hundred
men-of-war, and the fleets of France soon held their own against England or the Dutch.

[Sidenote: Lewis the Fourteenth.]

Such a power would have been formidable at any time; but it was doubly formidable when directed
by statesmen who in knowledge and ability were without rivals in Europe. No diplomatist could
compare with Lionne, no war minister with Louvois, no financier with Colbert. Their young master,
Lewis the Fourteenth, bigoted, narrow-minded, commonplace as he was, without personal honour
or personal courage, without gratitude and without pity, insane in his pride, insatiable in
his vanity, brutal in his selfishness, had still many of the qualities of a great ruler, industry,
patience, quickness of resolve, firmness of purpose, a capacity for discerning ability and
using it, an immense self-belief and self-confidence, and a temper utterly destitute indeed
of real greatness, but with a dramatic turn for seeming to be great. As a politician Lewis
had simply to reap the harvest which the two great Cardinals who went before him had sown.
Both had used to the profit of France the exhaustion and dissension which the wars of religion
had brought upon Europe. Richelieu turned the scale against the House of Austria by his alliance
with Sweden, with the United Provinces, and with the Protestant princes of Germany; and the
two great treaties by which Mazarin ended the Thirty Years War, the Treaty of Westphalia and
the Treaty of the Pyrenees, left the Empire disorganized and Spain powerless. From that moment
indeed Spain sank into a strange decrepitude. Robbed of the chief source of her wealth by the
independence of Holland, weakened at home by the revolt of Portugal, her infantry annihilated
by Condé in his victory of Rocroi, her fleet ruined by the Dutch, her best blood drained away
to the Indies, the energies of her people destroyed by the suppression of all liberty, civil
or religious, her intellectual life crushed by the Inquisition, her industry crippled by the
expulsion of the Moors, by financial oppression, and by the folly of her colonial system, the
kingdom which under Philip the Second had aimed at the empire of the world lay helpless and
exhausted under Philip the Fourth.

[Sidenote: France and Spain.]

The aim of Lewis was to carry on the policy of his predecessors, and above all to complete
the ruin of Spain. The conquest of the Spanish provinces in the Netherlands would carry his
border to the Scheldt. A more distant hope lay in the probable extinction of the Austrian line
which now sat on the throne of Spain. By securing the succession to that throne for a French
prince not only Castille and Aragon with the Spanish dependencies in Italy and the Netherlands
but the Spanish empire in the New World would be added to the dominions of France. Nothing
could save Spain but a union of the European powers, and to prevent this union was the work
to which the French negotiators were now bending their energies with singular success. The
intervention of the Emperor was guarded against by a renewal of the old alliances between France
and the lesser German princes. A league with the Turks gave the court of Vienna enough to do
on its eastern border. The old league with Sweden, the old friendship with Holland, were skilfully
maintained. England alone remained as a possible foe, and at this moment the policy of Charles
bound England to the side of Lewis.

[Sidenote: England and France.]

France was the wealthiest of European powers, and her subsidies could free Charles from his
dependence on the Parliament. The French army was the finest in the world, and French soldiers
could put down, it was thought, any resistance from English patriots. The aid of Lewis could
alone realize the aims of Charles, and Charles was willing to pay the price, that of a silent
concurrence in his Spanish projects, which Lewis demanded for his aid. It was to France therefore,
in spite of the resentment he felt at his treatment by her in his time of exile, that Charles
turned in the earliest days of his reign. There was no trace as yet of any formal alliance,
but two marriages showed the close connexion which was to be established between the kings.
Henrietta, the sister of Charles, was wedded to the Duke of Orleans, the brother of Lewis:
and this match served as the prelude to that of Charles himself with Catharine of Braganza,
a daughter of the king of Portugal. The English ministers were dazzled by the dowry which the
new queen brought with her: half-a-million in money, the fortress of Tangier in the Mediterranean,
the trading port of Bombay in the Indies, and a pledge of religious toleration for all English
merchants throughout the Portuguese colonies. The world at large saw rather the political significance
of the marriage. As the conquest of Portugal by Philip the Second had crowned the greatness
of the Spanish monarchy, so with its revolt had begun the fall of Spain. To recover Portugal
was the dream of every Spaniard, as to aid Portugal in the preservation of its independence
was the steady policy of France. The Portuguese marriage, the Portuguese alliance which followed
it, ranged England definitely amongst the friends of Lewis and the foes of Spain.

[Sidenote: Charles and his first Ministry.]

In England itself these indications of the king's foreign policy passed as yet almost without
notice. The attention of the nation was naturally concentrated on the work of political and
social restoration. What shape the new England would take, what was to be its political or
religious form, was still uncertain. It was still doubtful which political or religious party
had really the upper hand. The show of power lay as yet with the Presbyterians. It was by the
Presbyterians that the chief part in the Restoration had in fact been played; and it was the
Presbyterians who still almost exclusively possessed the magistracy and all local authority.
The first ministry which Charles ventured to form bore on it the marks of a compromise between
this powerful party and their old opponents. Its most influential member indeed was Sir Edward
Hyde, the adviser of the king during his exile, who soon became Earl of Clarendon and Lord
Chancellor. Lord Southampton, a steady Royalist, accepted the post of Lord Treasurer; and the
devotion of Ormond was rewarded with a dukedom and the dignity of Lord Steward. But the Presbyterian
interest was represented by Monk, who remained Lord-General of the army with the title of Duke
of Albemarle; and though the king's brother, James, Duke of York, was made Lord Admiral, the
administration of the fleet was virtually in the hands of one of Cromwell's followers, Montagu,
the new Earl of Sandwich. An old Puritan, Lord Say and Sele, was made Lord Privy Seal. Sir
Ashley Cooper, a leading member of the same party, was rewarded for his activity in bringing
about the Restoration by a barony and the office of Chancellor of the Exchequer. Of the two
Secretaries of State, the one, Nicholas, was a devoted Royalist; the other, Morice, was a steady
Presbyterian. Of the thirty members of the Privy Council, twelve had borne arms against the king.

[Sidenote: The Convention.]

It was clear that such a ministry was hardly likely to lend itself to a mere policy of reaction,
and the temper of the new Government therefore fell fairly in with the temper of the Convention
when that body, after declaring itself a Parliament, proceeded to consider the measures which
were requisite for a settlement of the nation. The Convention had been chosen under ordinances
which excluded Royalist "Malignants" from the right of voting; and the bulk of its members
were men of Presbyterian sympathies, loyalist to the core, but as adverse to despotism as the
Long Parliament itself. In its earlier days a member who asserted that those who had fought
against the king were as guilty as those who cut off his head was sternly rebuked from the
Chair. The first measure which was undertaken by the House, the Bill of Indemnity and Oblivion
for all offences committed during the recent troubles, showed at once the moderate character
of the Commons. In the punishment of the regicides indeed a Presbyterian might well be as zealous
as a Cavalier. In spite of a Proclamation issued in the first days of his return, which virtually
promised mercy to all the judges of the late king who surrendered themselves to justice, Charles
pressed for revenge on those whom he regarded as his father's murderers, and the Lords went
hotly with the king. It is to the credit of the Commons that they steadily resisted the cry
for blood. By the original provisions of the Bill of Oblivion and Indemnity only seven of the
living regicides were excluded from pardon; and though the rise of Royalist fervour during
the three months in which the bill was under discussion forced the House in the end to leave
almost all to the course of justice, yet a clause which made a special Act of Parliament necessary
for the execution of those who had surrendered under the Proclamation protected the lives of
most of them. Twenty-eight of the king's Judges were in the end arraigned at the bar of a Court
specially convened for their trial, but only thirteen were executed, and only one of these,
General Harrison, had played any conspicuous part in the rebellion. Twenty others, who had
been prominent in what were now called "the troubles" of the past twenty years, were declared
incapable of holding office under the State: and by an unjustifiable clause which was introduced
into the Act before its final adoption Sir Harry Vane and General Lambert, though they had
taken no part in the king's death, were specially exempted from the general pardon.

[Sidenote: Settlement of the Nation.]

In dealing with the questions of property which arose from the confiscations and transfers
of estates during the Civil Wars the Convention met with greater difficulties. No opposition
was made to the resumption of all Crown-lands by the State, but the Convention desired to protect
the rights of those who had purchased Church property and of those who were in actual possession
of private estates which had been confiscated by the Long Parliament or by the government which
succeeded it. The bills however which they prepared for this purpose were delayed by the artifices
of Hyde; and at the close of the Session the bishops and the evicted Royalists quietly re-entered
into the occupation of their old possessions. The Royalists indeed were far from being satisfied
with this summary confiscation. Fines and sequestrations had impoverished all the steady adherents
of the royal cause, and had driven many of them to forced sales of their estates; and a demand
was made for compensation for their losses and the cancelling of these sales. Without such
provisions, said the frenzied Cavaliers, the bill would be "a Bill of Indemnity for the king's
enemies, and of Oblivion for his friends." But here the Convention stood firm. All transfers
of property by sale were recognized as valid, and all claims of compensation for losses by
sequestration were barred by the Act.

From the settlement of the nation the Convention passed to the settlement of the relations
between the nation and the Crown. So far was the constitutional work of the Long Parliament
from being undone that its more important measures were silently accepted as the base of future
government. Not a voice demanded the restoration of the Star Chamber or of monopolies or of
the Court of High Commission; no one disputed the justice of the condemnation of Ship-money
or the assertion of the sole right of Parliament to grant supplies to the Crown. The Militia
indeed was placed in the king's hands; but the army was disbanded, though Charles was permitted
to keep a few regiments for his guard. The revenue was fixed at £1,200,000, and this sum was
granted to the king for life, a grant which might have been perilous for freedom had not the
taxes voted to supply the sum fallen constantly below this estimate, while the current expenses
of the Crown, even in time of peace, greatly exceeded it. But even for this grant a heavy price
was exacted. Though the rights of the Crown over lands held, as the bulk of English estates
were held, in military tenure had ceased to be of any great pecuniary value, they were indirectly
a source of considerable power. The rights of wardship and of marriage above all enabled the
sovereign to exercise a galling pressure on every landed proprietor in his social and domestic
concerns. Under Elizabeth the right of wardship had been used to secure the education of all
Catholic minors in the Protestant faith; and under James and his successor the charge of minors
had been granted to Court favourites or sold in open market to the highest bidder. But the
real value of these rights to the Crown lay in the political pressure which it was able to
exert through them on the country gentry. A squire was naturally eager to buy the good will
of a sovereign who might soon be the guardian of his daughter and the administrator of his
estate. But the same motives which made the Crown cling to this prerogative made the Parliament
anxious to do away with it. Its efforts to bring this about under James the First had been
foiled by the king's stubborn resistance; but the long interruption of these rights during
the troubles made their revival almost impossible at the Restoration. One of the first acts
therefore of the Convention was to free the country gentry by abolishing the claims of the
Crown to reliefs and wardship, purveyance, and pre-emption, and by the conversion of lands
held till then in chivalry into lands held in common socage. In lieu of his rights Charles
accepted a grant of £100,000 a year; a sum which it was originally purposed to raise by a tax
on the lands thus exempted from feudal exactions; but which was provided for in the end with
less justice by a general excise.

[Sidenote: England and the Church.]

Successful as the Convention had been in effecting a settlement of political matters it failed
in bringing about a settlement of the Church. In his proclamation from Breda Charles had promised
to respect liberty of conscience, and to assent to any Acts of Parliament which should be presented
to him for its security. The Convention was in the main Presbyterian; but it soon became plain
that the continuance of a purely Presbyterian system was impossible. "The generality of the
people," wrote Sharpe, a shrewd Scotch observer, from London, "are doting after Prelacy and
the Service-book." The Convention however still hoped for some modified form of Episcopalian
government which would enable the bulk of the Puritan party to remain within the Church. A
large part of the existing clergy indeed were Independents, and for these no compromise with
Episcopacy was possible: but the greater number were moderate Presbyterians who were ready
"for fear of worse" not only to submit to such a plan of Church government as Archbishop Usher
had proposed, a plan in which the bishop was only the president of a diocesan board of presbyters,
but to accept the Liturgy itself with a few amendments and the omission of "superstitious practices."
It was to a compromise of this kind that the king himself leant at the beginning, and a Royal
declaration announced his approval of the Puritan demands, limited the authority of the bishops
by the counsel of their presbyters, and promised a revision of the Book of Common Prayer. The
royal declaration was read at a conference of the two parties, and with it a petition from
the Independents praying for religious liberty. The king proposed to grant the prayer of the
petition, not for the Independents only but for all Christians. Dexterous as the move was,
it at once spread alarm. The silence of the bishops, the protest of Baxter, proved that on
the point of tolerating the Catholics all were at one. In itself however the declaration satisfied
the Puritan party, and one of their leaders, Dr. Reynolds, accepted a bishopric on the strength
of it. But the king's disappointment at the check given to his plans showed itself in the new
attitude of the government when a bill was introduced into the House of Commons by Sir Matthew
Hale to turn the declaration into a law. The opposition of the Episcopalian party was secretly
encouraged by the Royalist section of the ministry, and the bill thrown out by a small majority.
A fresh conference was promised, but in the absence of any Parliamentary action the Episcopal
party boldly availed themselves of their legal rights. The ejected clergy who still remained
alive entered again into their parsonages, the bishops returned to their sees, and the dissolution
of the Convention-Parliament destroyed the last hope of an ecclesiastical compromise.

[Sidenote: The Constitutional Royalists.]

The tide of loyalty had in fact been rising fast during its session, and its influence was
already seen in a shameful outrage wrought under the very orders of the Convention itself.
The bodies of Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton were torn from their graves and hung on gibbets
at Tyburn, while those of Pym and Blake were cast out of Westminster Abbey into St. Margaret's
churchyard. But it was only on the dissolution of the Convention-Parliament at the end of 1660
that the new political temper made itself vigorously felt. For the first time during twenty
years half England found itself able to go to the poll. From the outset of the war all who
had taken part on the Royalist side had been disfranchised as "malignants," and this disfranchisement
had been rigorously enforced even in the elections to the Convention. But "malignity" had now
ceased to be a crime, and the voters so long deprived of all share in the suffrage, vicars,
country gentlemen, farmers, with the whole body of the Catholics, rushed again to the poll.
Their temper, as might be expected, was one of vengeance on the men who had held them down
so long. In counties and towns alike the zeal for Church and king, the two causes for which
the voters had suffered, swept all hope of moderation or compromise before it. The ruling impulse
was to get utterly rid of the old representatives. The Presbyterians, dominant in the Convention,
sank in the Cavalier Parliament, as that of 1661 was called, to a handful of fifty members.

[Sidenote: The Parliament of 1661.]

The new House of Commons was made up for the most part of young men, of men, that is, who had
but a faint memory of the Stuart tyranny under which their childhood had been spent, but who
had a keen memory of living from manhood beneath the tyranny of the Commonwealth. They had
seen their fathers driven from the justice-bench, driven from the polling-booth, half-beggared
and imprisoned for no other cause but their loyalty to the king. They had seen the family oaks
felled and the family plate sent to the melting-pot to redeem their estates from the pitiless
hands of the committee at Goldsmiths' Hall. They had themselves been brought like poachers
before the justices for a horse-race or a cock-fight. At every breath of a rising a squad of
the New Model had quartered itself in the manor-house and a warrant from the Major-general
of the district had cleared the stables. Nor was this all. The same tyranny which pressed on
their social and political life had pressed on their religious life too. The solemn petitions
of the Book of Common Prayer, the words which had rung like sweet chimes in their ears from
their first childhood, had been banned from every village church as accursed things. It had
been only by stealth and at home that the cross could be signed on the brow of the babe whom
the squire brought to be christened. Hardly by stealth had it been possible to bury their dead
with the words of pathetic hope which have so often brought comfort to the ears of mourners.

[Sidenote: The Parliament and the Church.]

And now the young squires felt that their time had come. The Puritan, the Presbyterian, the
Commonwealthman, all were at their feet. Their very bearing was that of wild revolt against
the Puritan past. To a staid observer, Roger Pepys, they seemed a following of "the most profane,
swearing fellows that ever I heard in my life." Their whole policy appeared to be dictated
by a passionate spirit of reaction. They would drive the Presbyterians from the bench and the
polling-booth as the Presbyterians had driven them. They would make belief in a Commonwealth
as much a sign of "malignity" as their enemies had made belief in a king. They would have no
military rule: they hated indeed the very name of a standing army. They were hot Royalists
and they were hot churchmen. The old tyranny of the bishops was forgotten, the old jealousy
of the clergy set aside in the memory of a common suffering. Both had been robbed alike of
the same privileges of citizenship. Both had suffered together, and the new Parliament was
resolved that both should triumph together. For the first time since the Reformation the English
gentry were ardent not for king only but for Church and King.

The zeal of the Parliament at its outset therefore far outran that of Charles or his ministers.
Though it confirmed the other acts of its predecessor, the Convention, it could with difficulty
be brought to confirm the Act of Indemnity. The Commons pressed for the prosecution of Vane.
Vane was protected alike by the spirit of the law and by the king's pledge to the Convention
that, even if convicted of treason, he would not suffer him to be sent to the block. But he
was now brought to trial on the charge of treason against a king, "kept out of his royal authority
by traitors and rebels," and his spirited defence served as an excuse for his execution. "He
is too dangerous a man to let live," Charles wrote with characteristic coolness, "if we can
safely put him out of the way." But the new members were yet better churchmen than loyalists.
At the opening of their session they ordered every member to receive the communion, and the
League and Covenant to be solemnly burnt by the common hangman in Westminster Hall. The bill
which excluded the bishops from their seats in the House of Lords was repealed. The conference
at the Savoy between the Episcopalians and Presbyterians broke up in anger, and the few alterations
made in the Liturgy were made with a view to disgust rather than to conciliate the Puritan party.

[Sidenote: Clarendon.]

In spite of these outbursts however it would be unjust to look on the temper of the new Parliament
as a mere temper of revenge. Its wish was in the main to restore the constitutional system
which the civil war had violently interrupted. The Royalist party, as we have seen, had no
sort of sympathy with the policy of the early Stuarts. Their notions and their aims were not
those of Laud and Strafford, but of the group of constitutional loyalists who had followed
Falkland in his break with the Long Parliament in 1642. And of that group by a singular fortune
the most active and conspicuous member now filled the chief place in the counsels of the king.
Edward Hyde had joined Charles the First before the outbreak of the war, he had become his
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and it was to his pen that the bulk of the royal manifestoes were
attributed. He had passed with the young Prince of Wales into exile, and had remained the counsellor
of Charles the Second during the long years which preceded his return. His faithfulness had
been amply rewarded. He was now Earl of Clarendon and Lord Chancellor; and his influence in
the royal council, which had been great from the first, became supreme when the temper of the
new Parliament shattered the hopes of his Presbyterian opponents there. But his aim was simply
to carry out the policy he had clung to with Falkland. He was a lawyer by breeding, and his
theory of the State was a lawyer's theory. He looked on the English constitution, not as the
sum of political forces which were still in process of developement, but as a mass of fixed
and co-ordinated institutions whose form and mutual relations had been settled in some distant
past. He had opposed the Stuart tyranny because--as he held--it had broken down this constitution
to the profit of the Crown. He worked with the men of the Long Parliament in what he regarded
as the work of restoring it; he left them the moment that he fancied they were themselves about
to break it down to the profit of the People. Years of exile had only hardened his ideas. He
came back with the fixed resolve to hold the State together at the exact point where the first
reforms of the Long Parliament had left it. The power and prerogative of the Crown, the authority
of the Church, were to be jealously preserved, but they were to be preserved by the free will
and conviction of the Parliament. It was on this harmonious co-operation of these three great
institutions that Clarendon's system hung. Its importance to future times lay in his regarding
Parliament and the Church, not as mere accidents or checks in the system of English government,
but as essential parts of it, parts which were as needful for its healthy working as the Crown
itself, and through which the power of the Crown was to be exercised. Wholly to realize such
a conception it was necessary that the Parliament should be politically, the Church religiously,
representatives of the whole nation.

[Sidenote: Test and Corporation Act.]

The first of Clarendon's assumptions was not only a fact but a far greater fact than he imagined.
Hence it came about that his assembly of the Parliament year after year, and the steady way
in which he used it to do the Crown's work by setting its stamp on every great political measure,
became of the highest importance in our constitutional developement. The second was a fiction,
for half England had passed from the grasp of the Church, but it was to make it a fact that
Clarendon buckled himself to a desperate struggle with Nonconformity. It was under his guidance
that the Parliament turned to the carrying out of that principle of uniformity in Church as
well as in State on which the minister was resolved. The chief obstacle to such a policy lay
in the Presbyterians, and the strongholds of the Presbyterians were the corporations of the
boroughs. In many of the boroughs the corporation actually returned the borough members--in
all they exercised a powerful influence on their election. To drive the Presbyterians therefore
from municipal posts was to weaken if not to destroy the Presbyterian party in the House of
Commons. It was with a view of bringing about this object that the Cavalier Parliament passed
a severe Corporation Act, which required as a condition of entering on any municipal office
a reception of the communion according to the rites of the Anglican Church, a renunciation
of the League and Covenant, and a declaration that it was unlawful on any grounds to take up
arms against the king. The attempt was only partially successful, and test and oath were taken
after a while by men who regarded both simply as insults to their religious and political convictions.
But if Clarendon was foiled in his effort to secure political uniformity by excluding the Presbyterian
party from any connexion with the government of the State, he seemed for the time more successful
in his attempt to secure a religious uniformity by their exclusion from the Church.

[Sidenote: Act of Uniformity.]

An effectual blow was dealt at the Puritans in 1662 by the renewal of the Act of Uniformity.
Not only was the use of the Prayer-Book, and the Prayer-Book only, enforced in all public worship,
but an unfeigned consent and assent was demanded from every minister of the Church to all which
was contained in it; while for the first time since the Reformation all orders save those conferred
by the hands of bishops were legally disallowed. To give a political stamp to the new measure
the declaration exacted from corporations, that it was unlawful in any case to take up arms
against the Crown, was exacted from the clergy, and a pledge was required that they would seek
to make no change in Church or State. It was in vain that Ashley opposed the bill fiercely
in the Lords, that the peers pleaded for pensions to the ejected ministers and for the exemption
of schoolmasters from the necessity of subscription, and that even Clarendon, who felt that
the king's word was at stake, pressed for the insertion of clauses enabling the Crown to grant
dispensations from its provisions. Every suggestion of compromise was rejected by the Commons;
and Charles whose aim was to procure a toleration for the Catholics by allowing the Presbyterians
to feel the pressure of persecution at last assented to the bill.

[Sidenote: St. Bartholomew's Day.]

The bill passed in May, but its execution was deferred till August; and in the interval the
Presbyterian party in the royal Council struggled hard to obtain from the king a suspension
of its provisions by the exercise of his prerogative. Charles had promised this, but the bishops
were resolute to enforce the law; and on St. Bartholomew's Day, August the 24th, the last day
allowed for compliance with its requirements, nearly two thousand rectors and vicars, or about
a fifth of the English clergy, were driven from their parishes as Nonconformists. No such sweeping
alteration in the religious aspect of the Church had ever been seen before. The ecclesiastical
changes of the Reformation had been brought about with little change in the clergy itself.
Even the severities of the High Commission under Elizabeth ended in the expulsion of a few
hundreds. If Laud had gone zealously to work in emptying Puritan pulpits his zeal had been
to a great extent foiled by the restrictions of the law and by the growth of Puritan sentiment
in the clergy as a whole. A far wider change had been brought about in the expulsion of Royalist
clergy from their benefices during the Civil War; but the change had been gradual, and had
been at least ostensibly wrought for the most part on political or moral rather than on religious
grounds. The parsons expelled were expelled as "malignants," or as unfitted for their office
by idleness or vice or inability to preach. But the change wrought by St. Bartholomew's Day
was a distinctly religious change, and it was a change which in its suddenness and completeness
stood utterly alone. The rectors and vicars who were driven out were the most learned and the
most active of their order. The bulk of the great livings throughout the country were in their
hands. They stood at the head of the London clergy, as the London clergy stood in general repute
at the head of their class throughout England. They occupied the higher posts at the two Universities.
No English divine save Jeremy Taylor rivalled Howe as a preacher. No parson was so renowned
a controversialist or so indefatigable a parish priest as Baxter. And behind these men stood
a fifth of the whole body of the clergy, men whose zeal and labour had diffused throughout
the country a greater appearance of piety and religion than it had ever displayed before.

[Sidenote: Its religious results.]

But the expulsion of these men was far more to the Church of England than the loss of their
individual services. It was the definite expulsion of a great party which from the time of
the Reformation had played the most active and popular part in the life of the Church. It was
the close of an effort which had been going on ever since Elizabeth's accession to bring the
English Communion into closer relations with the Reformed Communions of the Continent and into
greater harmony with the religious instincts of the nation at large. The Church of England
stood from that moment isolated and alone among all the Churches of the Christian world. The
Reformation had severed it irretrievably from those which still clung to the obedience of the
Papacy. By its rejection of all but episcopal orders the Act of Uniformity severed it as irretrievably
from the general body of the Protestant Churches whether Lutheran or Reformed. And while thus
cut off from all healthy religious communion with the world without it sank into immobility
within. With the expulsion of the Puritan clergy all change, all efforts after reform, all
national developement, suddenly stopped. From that time to this the Episcopal Church has been
unable to meet the varying spiritual needs of its adherents by any modifications of its government
or its worship. It stands alone among all the religious bodies of Western Christendom in its
failure through two hundred years to devise a single new service of prayer or of praise.

[Sidenote: Its political results.]

But if the issues of St. Bartholomew's Day have been harmful to the spiritual life of the English
Church they have been in the highest degree advantageous to the cause of religious liberty.
At the Restoration religious freedom seemed again to have been lost. Only the Independents
and a few despised sects, such as the Quakers, upheld the right of every man to worship God
according to the bidding of his own conscience. The bulk of the Puritan Party, with the Presbyterians
at its head, was at one with its opponents in desiring a uniformity of worship, if not of belief,
throughout the land. Had the two great parties within the Church held together their weight
would have been almost irresistible. Fortunately the great severance of St. Bartholomew's Day
drove out the Presbyterians from the Church to which they clung, and forced them into a general
union with sects which they had hated till then almost as bitterly as the bishops themselves.
A common persecution soon blended the Nonconformists into one. Persecution broke down before
the numbers, the wealth, and the political weight of the new sectarians; and the Church for
the first time in its history found itself confronted with an organized body of Dissenters
without its pale. The impossibility of crushing such a body as this wrested from English statesmen
the first legal recognition of freedom of worship in the Toleration Act; their rapid growth
in later times has by degrees stripped the Church of almost all the exclusive privileges which
it enjoyed as a religious body, and now threatens what remains of its official connexion with
the State. With these remoter consequences however we are not as yet concerned. It is enough
to note here that with the Act of Uniformity and the expulsion of the Puritan clergy a new
element in our religious and political history, the element of Dissent, the influence of the
Nonconformist churches, comes first into play.

[Sidenote: Charles and Clarendon.]

The sudden outbreak and violence of the persecution, the breaking up of conventicles, the imprisonment
of those who were found worshipping in them, turned the disappointment of the Presbyterians
into despair. Many were for retiring to Holland, others proposed a general flight to New England
and the American colonies. Among the Baptists and Independents there was vague talk of an appeal
to arms. So threatening indeed did the attitude of the Sectaries become that Clarendon was
anxious to provide himself with men and money and above all with foreign aid for such a struggle,
should it come. Different indeed as were the aims of the king and his Chancellor the course
of events drew them inevitably together. If Charles desired the friendship of France as a support
in any possible struggle with the Parliament Clarendon desired it as a support in the possible
struggle with the Nonconformists. The first step in this French policy had been the marriage
with Catharine of Braganza; the second was the surrender of Dunkirk. The maintenance of the
garrison at Dunkirk was a heavy drag upon the royal treasury, and a proposal for its sale to
Spain, which was made by Lord Sandwich in council, was seized by Charles and Clarendon as a
means of opening a bargain with France. To France the profit was immense. Not only was a port
gained in the Channel which served during the next hundred years as a haunt for privateers
in every war between the two powers, but the withdrawal of the English garrison at the close
of 1662 from a port which necessarily drew England into every contest between France and Spain
freed the hands of Lewis for the stroke he was patiently planning against the Low Countries.
Lewis however proved a shrewd bargainer, and not a half of the sum originally demanded as its
price found its way into the royal treasury. But the money was accepted as a pledge of the
close connexion which was to bind the two crowns together. Charles declared the cession to
be "one of the greatest proofs he could give of his friendship for the French king," and the
Duke of York pressed the bargain with assurances that his strongest desire, like that of his
brother, was "to unite our interests with those of France." Clarendon was as desirous of such
a union as his master. In his eyes the friendship of France, the money, the force placed in
his hands by the return of the garrison of Dunkirk to England, were so many safeguards against
the outbreak of rebellion which his policy had provoked.

[Sidenote: Ashley Cooper.]

But he had reckoned without Charles, and the time was come when the king was to show how widely
his temper and aim differed from those of his Chancellor. Charles had no taste for civil war,
nor had he the slightest wish to risk his throne in securing the supremacy of the Church. His
aim was to use the strife between the two great bodies of Protestant religionists so as to
secure toleration for the Catholics and revive at the same time his prerogative of dispensing
with the execution of laws. At the close of 1662 therefore he suddenly broke from the policy
of Clarendon and laid his plans for toleration before the Presbyterian party who were struggling
against the Chancellor in the royal council. Of that party Ashley Cooper, Lord Ashley, was
now in influence, though not in rank, the chief. Every step in his career had brought out the
boldness, the self-reliance, the versatility and readiness of resource which distinguished
his character. In mere boyhood he had saved his estate from the greed of his guardians by boldly
appealing in person for protection to Noy, who was then attorney-general. As an undergraduate
at Oxford he organized a rebellion of the freshmen against the oppressive customs which were
enforced by the senior men of his college, and succeeded in abolishing them. At eighteen he
was a member of the Short Parliament. On the outbreak of the Civil War he took part with the
king; but in the midst of the royal successes he foresaw the ruin of the royal cause, passed
to the Parliament, attached himself to the fortunes of Cromwell, and became member of the Council
of State. A temporary disgrace during the last years of the Protectorate only quickened him
to a restless hatred which did much to bring about its fall. His bitter invectives against
the dead Protector, his intrigues with Monk, and the active part which he took in the king's
recall, were rewarded at the Restoration with a peerage and with promotion to a foremost share
in the royal councils.

Ashley was then a man of forty, and under the Commonwealth he had been famous in Dryden's contemptuous
phrase as "the loudest bagpipe of the squeaking train"; but he was no sooner a minister of
Charles than he flung himself into the debauchery of the Court with an ardour which surprised
even his master. "You are the wickedest dog in England!" laughed the king at some unscrupulous
jest of his counsellor's. "Of a subject, sir, I believe I am!" was the unabashed reply. But
the debauchery of Ashley was simply a mask. He was in fact temperate by nature and habit, and
his ill-health rendered any great excess impossible. Men soon found that the courtier who lounged
in Lady Castlemaine's boudoir, or drank and jested with Sedley and Buckingham, was a diligent
and able man of business. "He is a man," says the puzzled Pepys, three years after the Restoration,
"of great business and yet of pleasure and dissipation too." His rivals were as envious of
the ease and mastery with which he dealt with questions of finance as of the "nimble wit" which
won the favour of the king. Even in later years his industry earned the grudging praise of
his enemies. Dryden owned that as Chancellor he was "swift to despatch and easy of access,"
and wondered at the fevered activity which "refused his age the needful hours of rest." His
activity indeed was the more wonderful that his health was utterly broken. An accident in early
days left behind it an abiding weakness whose traces were seen in the furrows which seamed
his long pale face, in the feebleness of his health, and the nervous tremor which shook his
puny frame. The "pigmy body" was "fretted to decay" by the "fiery soul" within it. But pain
and weakness brought with them no sourness of spirit. Ashley was attacked more unscrupulously
than any statesman save Walpole; but Burnet, who did not love him, owns that he was never bitter
or angry in speaking of his assailants. Even the wit with which he crushed them was commonly
good-humoured. "When will you have done preaching?" a bishop murmured testily, as he was speaking
in the House of Peers. "When I am a bishop, my Lord!" was the laughing reply.

[Sidenote: Ashley's Policy.]

As a statesman Ashley not only stood high among his contemporaries from his wonderful readiness
and industry, but he stood far above them in his scorn of personal profit. Even Dryden, while
raking together every fault in his character, owns that his hands were clean. As a political
leader his position was to modern eyes odd enough. In religion he was at most a Deist, with
some fanciful notions "that after death our souls lived in stars," and his life was that of
a debauchee. But Deist and debauchee as he was he remained the representative of the Presbyterian
and Nonconformist party in the Royal Council. He was the steady and vehement advocate of toleration,
but his advocacy was based on purely political grounds. He saw that persecution would fail
to bring back the Dissenters to the Church, and that the effort to recall them only left the
country disunited. He saw too that such a disunion exposed English liberty to invasion from
the Crown, while it robbed England herself of all influence in Europe at a time when her influence
alone could effectually check the ambition of France. The one means of uniting Churchmen and
Dissidents was by a policy of toleration, but in the temper of England after the Restoration
he saw no hope of obtaining toleration save from the king. Wit, debauchery, rapidity in the
despatch of business, were all therefore used as a means to gain influence over the king, and
to secure him as a friend in the struggle which Ashley carried on against the intolerance of
Clarendon.

[Sidenote: The first Declaration of Indulgence.]

Charles, as we have seen, had his own game to play, and his own reasons for protecting Ashley
during his vehement struggle against the Test and Corporation Act, the Act of Uniformity, and
the persecution of the Dissidents. But the struggle had been fruitless, and the only chance--as
it seemed to Ashley--of securing toleration was to receive it on the king's own terms. The
desire for toleration had in fact not only overcome their dread of Catholicism, but even blinded
them to the political dangers of a revival of the dispensing power. The indulgence applied
equally to Catholics as to Protestants; it was in itself a bold assertion of the royal prerogative
of suspending the execution of the law. The Presbyterian statesmen indeed aimed at giving the
dispensing power a legal basis. A bill introduced by Lords Ashley and Robartes in the opening
of 1663, in redemption of a pledge contained in the declaration itself, gave Charles the power
to dispense not only with the provisions of the Act of Uniformity but with the penalties provided
by all laws which enforced religious conformity or which imposed religious tests. But the policy
of Charles as of Ashley broke instantly down before the good sense as well as the religious
passion of the people at large. If the Presbyterian leaders in the council had stooped to accept
the aid of the declaration, the bulk of the Dissidents had no mind to have their grievances
used as a means of procuring by a side wind toleration for Roman Catholics, or of building
up again that dispensing power which the civil wars had thrown down. The Churchmen on the other
hand with the bishops at their head were resolute in opposition. Ever since the issue of the
Declaration of Indulgence the hatred felt by the Churchmen for the Dissidents had been embittered
by suspicions of a secret league between the Dissidents and the Catholics in which the king
was taking part. The Houses therefore struck simultaneously at both their opponents. They forced
Charles by an address to withdraw his pledge of toleration. They then extorted from him a proclamation
for the banishment of all Catholic priests, and followed this up by a Conventicle Act, which
punished with fine, imprisonment, and transportation on a third offence all persons who met
in greater number than five for any religious worship save that of the Common Prayer.

[Sidenote: Clarendon's triumph.]

What added to the sting of this defeat was the open opposition which Clarendon had offered
to his master's scheme in Parliament. From that moment Charles resolved on his minister's ruin.
But Clarendon's position was too strong to be easily shaken. Hated by the Catholics and the
Dissenters, opposed in the Council itself by Ashley and the Presbyterian leaders, opposed in
the Court by the king's mistress, Lady Castlemaine, as well as by the supple and adroit Henry
Bennet, a creature of the king's who began to play a foremost part in politics, Clarendon was
still strong in his long and intimate connexion with the king's affairs, his alliance with
the royal house through the marriage of his daughter, Anne Hyde, with the Duke of York, in
his untiring industry, his wide capacity for business, above all in the support of the Church
and the confidence of the royalist and orthodox House of Commons. To the Commons and the Church
he was only bound the closer by the hatred of Catholics and Nonconformists or by the futile
attempts at impeachment which were made by the Catholic Earl of Bristol in the summer of 1663.
The "Declaration" indeed had strengthened Clarendon's position. It had identified his policy
of persecution with the maintenance of constitutional liberty, and had thrown on Ashley and
his opponents the odium of an attempt to set up again the dispensing power and of betraying,
as it was thought, the interests of Protestantism into the hands of Rome. Never in fact had
Clarendon's power seemed stronger than in 1664; and the only result of the attempt to shake
his system of intolerance was an increase of persecution. Of the sufferings of the expelled
clergy one of their number, Richard Baxter, has given us an account. "Many hundreds of them
with their wives and children had neither house nor bread. . . . Their congregations had enough
to do, besides a small maintenance, to help them out of prisons or to maintain them there.
Though they were as frugal as possible they could hardly live; some lived on little more than
brown bread and water, many had but eight or ten pounds a year to maintain a family, so that
a piece of flesh has not come to one of their tables in six weeks' time; their allowance could
scarce afford them bread and cheese. One went to plow six days and preached on the Lord's Day.
Another was forced to cut tobacco for a livelihood." But poverty was the least of their sufferings.
They were jeered at by the players. They were hooted through the streets by the mob. "Many
of the ministers being afraid to lay down their ministry after they had been ordained to it,
preached to such as would hear them in fields and private houses, till they were apprehended
and cast into gaols, where many of them perished." They were excommunicated in the Bishop's
Court or fined for non-attendance at church; and a crowd of informers grew up who made a trade
of detecting the meetings they held at midnight. Alleyn, the author of the well-known "Alarm
to the Unconverted," died at thirty-six from the sufferings he endured in Taunton Gaol. Vavasour
Powell, the apostle of Wales, spent the eleven years which followed the Restoration in prisons
at Shrewsbury, Southsea, and Cardiff, till he perished in the Fleet.

[Sidenote: England and the Dutch.]

The success however of this experiment in the repression of religious opinion rested mainly
on the absence of any disturbing influences from without; and in the midst of his triumph over
his opponents at home Clarendon was watching anxiously the growth of a quarrel which threatened
war with the Dutch. The old commercial jealousy between the two rival merchant nations, which
had been lulled in 1662 by a formal treaty of peace, but which still lived on in petty squabbles
at sea, was embittered by the cession of Bombay--a port which gave England an entry into the
profitable trade with India--as well as by the establishment of a West Indian Company in London
which opened a traffic with the Gold Coast of Africa, and brought back from Guinea the gold
from which our first "guineas" were struck. In both countries there was a general irritation
which vented itself in cries for war, and in the session of 1664 the English Parliament presented
an address to the Crown praying for the exaction of redress for wrongs done by the Dutch to
English merchants. But the squabble was of long standing, and there was nothing to threaten
any immediate strife. Charles himself indeed shrank from wars which he foresaw would leave
him at the mercy of his Parliament; and Clarendon with Ormond, the bishops, and the whole Church
party, were conscious that the maintenance of peace was needful for their system of religious
repression. The quarrel therefore would have dragged on in endless recriminations had not the
restless hatred of the Chancellor's opponents seen in it a means of bringing about the end
in which they had as yet been foiled. Bennet and the Court, Ashley and the Presbyterian party
in the Council, Bristol and the Catholics, foresaw that the pressure of such a war, the burdens
it would bring with it, and the supplies for which he would be driven to ask, would soon ruin
the Chancellor's popularity with the Commons. Stripped of their support, it was easy to bring
about his fall and clear the stage for fresh efforts after a religious toleration. The popular
temper made their task of forcing on a war an easy one. The king was won over, partly by playing
on his old resentment at the insults he had suffered from Holland during his exile, partly
by his hope that the suffering which war would bring on Holland would end in the overthrow
of the aristocratic republicans who had governed the United Provinces ever since the fall of
the House of Orange, and in the restoration of his young nephew, William of Orange, to the
old influence of his family over the State. Such a restoration would not only repay the debt
of gratitude which the Royalist cause owed to the efforts of William's father in its support,
but would remove the dread which the English government never ceased to feel of the encouragement
which the Dissidents at home derived from the mere existence close by of a presbyterian and
republican government in Holland. Against the combined pressure of the king, the people, and
his enemies in the cabinet and the court, Clarendon was unable to contend. Attacks on the Dutch
settlements, on the Gold Coast, and the American coast, made war inevitable; a fleet was manned;
and at the close of 1664 the Parliament in a fit of unwonted enthusiasm voted two millions
and a half for the coming struggle.

[Sidenote: The Dutch War.]

The war at sea which followed was a war of giants. No such mighty fleets have ever disputed
the sovereignty of the seas, nor have any naval battles equalled the encounters of the two
nations in dogged and obstinate fighting. In the spring of 1665 the two fleets, each a hundred
ships strong, mustered in the Channel, the Dutch under Opdam, the English under the Duke of
York. Their first battle off Lowestoft, obstinate as all the engagements between the two nations,
ended in a victory for the English, a victory due chiefly to the superiority of their guns
and to a shot which blew up the flag-ship of the Dutch Admiral in the midst of the engagement.
But the thought of triumph was soon forgotten in a terrible calamity which now fell on London.
In six months a hundred thousand Londoners died of the Plague which broke out in May in the
crowded streets of the capital, and which drove the Parliament from London to assemble in October
at Oxford. To the dismay caused by the Plague was added the growing irritation at the increasing
pressure of the war and a sense of the grave dangers into which the struggle with Holland was
plunging the country both at home and abroad. The enormous grant which had been made at the
outset for three years was already spent and a fresh supply had to be granted. But hard and
costly as the Dutch war had proved, a far graver and costlier struggle seemed opening in its
train. The war was a serious stumbling-block in the way of the French projects. Holland on
the strength of old treaties, England on the strength of her new friendship, alike called on
Lewis for aid; but to give aid to either was to run the risk of throwing the other on the aid
of the House of Austria, and of building up the league which could alone check France in its
designs upon Spain. Only peace could keep the European states disunited, and it was on their
disunion that Lewis counted for success in his design of seizing Flanders, a design which was
now all but ripe for execution. At the outset of the war therefore he offered his mediation,
and suggested the terms of a compromise. But his attempt was fruitless, and the defeat off
Lowestoft forced him to more effective action. He declared himself forced to give aid to the
Dutch though he cautiously restricted his help to the promise of a naval reinforcement. But
the chief work of his negotiators was to prevent any extension of the struggle. Sweden and
Brandenburg, from both of which powers Charles counted on support, were held in check by the
intervention of France; and the Bishop of Münster, whom an English subsidy had roused to an
attack on his Dutch neighbours, was forced by the influence of Lewis to withdraw his troops.
Sir William Temple, the English ambassador at Brussels, strove to enlist Spain on the side
of England by promising to bring about a treaty between that country and Portugal which would
free its hands for an attack on Lewis, and so anticipate his plans for an attack under more
favourable circumstances on herself. But Lewis knew how to play on the Catholic bigotry of
Spain, and the English offers were set aside.

[Sidenote: England and France.]

Lewis thus succeeded in isolating England and in narrowing the war within the limits of a struggle
at sea, a struggle in which the two great sea-powers could only weaken one another to the profit
of his own powerful navy. But his intervention was far from soaring England into peace. The
old hatred of France had quickened the English people to an early perception of the dangers
which were to spring from French ambition; and as early as 1661 the London mob backed the Spanish
ambassador in a street squabble for precedence with the ambassador of France. "We do all naturally
love the Spanish," Pepys comments on this at the time, "and hate the French." The marriage
of Catharine, the sale of Dunkirk, were taken as signs of the growth of a French influence
over English policy, and the jealousy and suspicion they had aroused were seen in the reception
with which the Parliament met the announcement of Lewis's hostility. No sooner had the words
fallen from Charles's lips than "there was a great noise in the Parliament," writes the French
statesman Louvois, "to show the joy of the two Houses at the prospect of a fight with us."
But even the warlike temper of the Parliament could not blind it to the new weight which was
given to the struggle by this intervention of France. Above all it woke men to the dangers
at home. The policy of Clarendon had broken England into two nations. Whatever might be the
attitude of Monk or Ashley in the royal closet the sympathies of the Nonconformists as a whole
could not fail to be opposed to a war with the Dutch; and as Charles was striving with some
show of success to rouse the Orange party in the States to active opposition against the dominant
republicans, so the Dutch statesmen summoned the banished regicides to Holland, and dreamed
of a landing in England which would bring about a general rising of the Dissidents against
Charles. The less scrupulous diplomacy of Lewis availed itself of every element of opposition,
called Algernon Sidney to Paris and supplied him with money as a possible means of rousing
the English republicans, while it corresponded with the Presbyterians in Scotland and the hardly
less bitter Catholics of Ireland.

[Sidenote: The Religious Persecution.]

The dread of internal revolt was quickened by the new attitude of resistance taken by the Nonconformists.
When the clergy fled from London at the appearance of the Plague, their pulpits were boldly
occupied in open defiance of the law by the ministers who had been ejected from them. The terror
and hatred roused by this revival of a foe that seemed to have been crushed was seen in the
Five Mile Act, which completed in 1665 the code of persecution. By its provisions every clergyman
who had been driven out by the Act of Uniformity was called on to swear that he held it unlawful
under any pretext to take up arms against the king, and that he would at no time "endeavour
any alteration of government in Church or State." In case of refusal he was forbidden to go
within five miles of any borough or of any place where he had been wont to minister. As the
main body of the Nonconformists belonged to the city and trading classes, the effect of this
measure was to rob them of any religious teaching at all. But the tide of religious intolerance
was now slowly ebbing and, bigoted as the House was, a motion to impose the oath of the Five
Mile Act on every person in the nation was rejected in the same session by a majority of six.
The sufferings of the Nonconformists indeed could hardly fail to tell on the sympathies of
the people. The thirst for revenge which had been roused by the tyranny of the Presbyterians
in their hour of triumph was satisfied by their humiliation in their hour of defeat. The sight
of pious and learned clergymen driven from their homes and their flocks, of religious meetings
broken up by the constables, of preachers set side by side with thieves and outcasts in the
dock, of gaols crammed with honest enthusiasts whose piety was their only crime, pleaded more
eloquently for toleration than all the reasoning in the world.

[Sidenote: Milton.]

We have a clue to the extent of the persecution from what we know to have been its effect on
a single sect. The Quakers had excited alarm by their extravagances of manner as well as by
their refusal to bear arms or to take oaths, and a special Act was passed for their repression.
They were one of the smallest of the Nonconformist bodies, but more than four thousand were
soon in prison, and five hundred of these were imprisoned in London alone. The king's Declaration
of Indulgence twelve years later set free twelve hundred Quakers who had found their way to
the gaols. For not only had persecution failed to kill religious liberty, but the very Puritanism
which the Cavalier Parliament believed itself to have trodden under foot was at this moment
proving the noble life it had drawn from suffering and defeat. It was at this moment that Milton
produced the "Paradise Lost." During the Civil War he had been engaged in strife with Presbyterians
and with Royalists, pleading for civil and religious freedom, for freedom of social life and
freedom of the press. At a later time he became Latin secretary to the Protector in spite of
a blindness which had been brought on by the intensity of his study. The Restoration found
him of all living men the most hateful to the Royalists, for it was his "Defence of the English
People" which had justified throughout Europe the execution of the king. Parliament ordered
his book to be burnt by the common hangman; he was for a time imprisoned; and even when released
he had to live amidst threats of assassination from fanatical Cavaliers. To the ruin of his
cause were added personal misfortunes in the bankruptcy of the scrivener who held the bulk
of his property, and in the Fire of London which deprived him of much of what was left. As
age drew on he found himself reduced to comparative poverty and driven to sell his library
for subsistence. Even among the Sectaries who shared his political opinions Milton stood in
religious opinion alone, for he had gradually severed himself from every accepted form of faith,
had embraced Arianism, and had ceased to attend at any place of worship.

[Sidenote: His Life.]

Nor was his home a happy one. The grace and geniality of his youth disappeared in the drudgery
of a schoolmaster's life and amongst the invectives of controversy. In age his temper became
stern and exacting. His daughters, who were forced to read to their blind father in languages
which they could not understand, revolted against their bondage. But solitude and misfortune
only brought into bolder relief Milton's inner greatness. There was a grand simplicity in the
life of his later years. He listened every morning to a chapter of the Hebrew Bible, and after
musing in silence for a while pursued his studies till mid-day. Then he took exercise for an
hour, played for another hour on the organ or viol, and renewed his studies. The evening was
spent in converse with visitors and friends. For, lonely and unpopular as Milton was, there
was one thing about him which made his house in Bunhill Fields a place of pilgrimage to the
wits of the Restoration. He was the last of the Elizabethans. He had possibly seen Shakspere,
as on his visits to London after his retirement to Stratford the playwright passed along Bread
Street to his wit combats at the Mermaid. He had been the contemporary of Webster and Massinger,
of Herrick and Crashaw. His "Comus" and "Arcades" had rivalled the masques of Ben Jonson. It
was with a reverence drawn from thoughts like these that men looked on the blind poet as he
sate, clad in black, in his chamber hung with rusty green tapestry, his fair brown hair falling
as of old over a calm serene face that still retained much of its youthful beauty, his cheeks
delicately coloured, his clear grey eyes showing no trace of their blindness. But famous whether
for good or ill as his prose writings had made him, during fifteen years only a few sonnets
had broken his silence as a singer. It was now in his blindness and old age, with the cause
he loved trodden under foot by men as vile as the rabble in "Comus," that the genius of Milton
took refuge in the great poem on which through years of silence his imagination had been brooding.
His lips were touched at last. In the quiet retreat of his home in Bunhill Fields he mused
during these years of persecution and loneliness on the "Paradise Lost." But great as the two
last works were their greatness was eclipsed by that of their predecessor. The whole genius
of Milton expressed itself in the "Paradise Lost." It is only when we review the strangely
mingled elements which make up the poem that we realize the genius which fused them into such
a perfect whole. The meagre outline of the Hebrew legend is lost in the splendour and music
of Milton's verse. The stern idealism of Geneva is clothed in the gorgeous robes of the Renascence.
If we miss something of the free play of Spenser's fancy, and yet more of the imaginative delight
in their own creations which gives so exquisite a life to the poetry of the early dramatists,
we find in place of these the noblest example which our literature affords of the majesty of
classic form.

[Sidenote: The Epic of Puritanism.]

But it is not with the literary value of the "Paradise Lost" that we are here concerned. Its
historic importance lies in this, that it is the Epic of Puritanism. Its scheme is the problem
with which the Puritan wrestled in hours of gloom and darkness--the problem of sin and redemption,
of the world-wide struggle of evil against good. The intense moral concentration of the Puritan
had given an almost bodily shape to spiritual abstractions before Milton gave life and being
to the forms of Sin and Death. It was the Puritan tendency to mass into one vast "body of sin"
the various forms of human evil, and by the very force of a passionate hatred to exaggerate
their magnitude and their power, to which we owe the conception of Milton's Satan. The greatness
of the Puritan aim in the long and wavering struggle for justice and law and a higher good,
the grandeur of character which the contest developed, the colossal forms of good and evil
which moved over its stage, the debates and conspiracies and battles which had been men's life
for twenty years, the mighty eloquence and the mightier ambition which the war had roused into
being--all left their mark on the "Paradise Lost." Whatever was highest and best in the Puritan
temper spoke in the nobleness and elevation of the poem, in its purity of tone, in its loftiness
of conception, in its ordered and equable realization of a great purpose. Even in his boldest
flights Milton is calm and master of himself. His touch is always sure. Whether he passes from
Heaven to Hell or from the council hall of Satan to the sweet conference of Adam and Eve his
tread is steady and unfaltering.

[Sidenote: Its defects.]

But if the poem expresses the higher qualities of the Puritan temper it expresses no less exactly
its defects. Throughout it we feel almost painfully a want of the finer and subtler sympathies,
of a large and genial humanity, of a sense of spiritual mystery. Dealing as Milton does with
subjects the most awful and mysterious that poet ever chose, he is never troubled by the obstinate
questionings of invisible things which haunted the imagination of Shakspere. We look in vain
for any Æschylean background of the vast unknown. "Man's disobedience" and the scheme for man's
redemption are laid down as clearly and with just as little mystery as in a Puritan discourse.
On topics such as these, even God the Father (to borrow Pope's sneer) "turns a school divine."
As in his earlier poems he had ordered and arranged nature, so in the "Paradise Lost" Milton
orders and arranges Heaven and Hell. His mightiest figures, Angel or Archangel, Satan or Belial,
stand out colossal but distinct. There is just as little of the wide sympathy with all that
is human which is so lovable in Chaucer and Shakspere. On the contrary the Puritan individuality
is nowhere so overpowering as in Milton. He leaves the stamp of himself deeply graven on all
he creates. We hear his voice in every line of his poem. The cold, severe conception of moral
virtue which reigns throughout it, the intellectual way in which he paints and regards beauty
(for the beauty of Eve is a beauty which no mortal man may love) are Milton's own. We feel
his inmost temper in the stoical self-repression which gives its dignity to his figures. Adam
utters no cry of agony when he is driven from Paradise. Satan suffers in a defiant silence.
It is to this intense self-concentration that we must attribute the strange deficiency of humour
which the poet shared with the Puritans generally, and which here and there breaks the sublimity
of the poem with strange slips into the grotesque. But it is above all to this Puritan deficiency
in human sympathy that we must attribute Milton's wonderful want of dramatic genius. Of the
power which creates a thousand different characters, which endows each with its appropriate
act and word, which loses itself in its own creations, no great poet ever had less.

[Sidenote: The Naval War.]

While Milton was busy with his verse events were moving fast in favour of the cause which he
saw trodden under foot. Defeat had only spurred the Dutch to fresh efforts. Their best seaman,
De Ruyter, had reorganized their fleet, and appeared off the North Foreland in May 1666, with
eighty-eight vessels, stronger and better armed than those of Opdam. The English fleet was
almost as strong; but a squadron had been detached under Prince Rupert to meet a French force
reported to be at Belleisle, and it was with but sixty ships that the new admiral, Monk, Duke
of Albemarle, fell in with De Ruyter's armament. There was no thought however of retreat, and
a fight at once began, the longest and most stubborn that the seas have ever seen. The battle
had raged for two whole days, and Monk, left with only sixteen ships uninjured, saw himself
on the brink of ruin, when on the morning of the third he was saved by the arrival of Rupert.
Though still greatly inferior in force, the dogged admiral renewed the fight on the fourth
day as the Dutch drew off to their own coast, but the combat again ended in De Ruyter's favour
and the English took refuge in the Thames. Their fleet was indeed ruined; twenty ships had
been taken or sunk and a far larger number disabled; but the losses of the enemy had been hardly
less. What the Dutch had discovered, owned De Witt, was, "that English sailors might be killed
and English ships burned, but that there was no conquering Englishmen." At the close of July
in fact the two fleets, again refitted, met anew off the North Foreland; and a second fight,
as hard fought as that which had gone before, ended in an English victory. Twenty Dutch sail
had struck or sunk, seven thousand Dutch seamen had been slain, while the English loss was
comparatively small. The victorious fleet sailed along the rich coast of Holland, burning merchantmen
and plundering its undefended towns. But Holland was as unconquerable as England herself. In
a short time the Dutch fleet was again refitted and at sea, and Lewis, whose aid had hitherto
been only in words, thought it time to act. The French fleet joined the Dutch, and the English
found themselves too inferior in force to venture on a fresh battle for the command of the Channel.

[Sidenote: Parliament and the War.]

It was at this moment of national disappointment, with the fruit of great efforts snatched
away and the sea lost, that a fresh calamity at home was added to the sufferings of the war.
In the night of the second of September a fire broke out in the heart of London which raged
for four days and reduced the city to ashes from the Tower to the Temple. Thirteen hundred
houses and ninety churches were destroyed. The loss of merchandise and property was beyond
count. Again the Parliament with stubborn pride voted a subsidy of nearly two millions to refit
the fleet. But the money came in slowly. The treasury was so utterly drained that it was agreed
to fit out no large ships for the coming year. The ministers indeed were already seeking to
conclude a peace through the mediation of France. It was not the public distress alone which
drove Clarendon to peace negotiations: his own fears and those of the king had been alike fulfilled
as the war went on. The country squires were disgusted at the obstinacy and cost of the struggle,
and they visited their disgust on Clarendon as its supposed author. He had lost the support
of the Houses, and the admission of fresh opponents into the royal council spoke of the secret
enmity of the king. But Charles too had his reasons for desiring peace. He had a sleepless
distrust of Parliaments, and his distrust was already justified. The "Cavalier" Parliament
had met in a passion of loyalty. It had pressed for the death of the regicides. It had hardly
been hindered from throwing all England into confusion by refusing its assent to the Amnesty
Bill. It had ordered the League and Covenant, as well as the act deposing Charles Stuart, to
be burned by the common hangman. It had declared the taking up arms against the king on any
pretext to be treason, and had turned its declaration into a test to be exacted from every
parson and every alderman. And yet this loyal Parliament had faced and checked the Crown as
boldly and pertinaciously as the Long Parliament itself. It had carried out its own ecclesiastical
policy in the teeth of the known wishes of the king. It had humiliated him by forcing him to
cancel his public declaration in favour of the Nonconformists. It gave counsel in foreign affairs,
and met the king's leanings towards Lewis by expressions of its will for a contest with France.
It voted large subsidies indeed, but at this juncture it inserted into the Subsidy Bill a clause
which appointed a Parliamentary commission with powers to examine into the royal expenditure,
and to question royal officers upon oath.

[Sidenote: The Dutch in the Medway.]

To Clarendon such a demand seemed as great an usurpation on the rights of the Crown as any
measure of the Long Parliament, and he advised a dissolution. But the advice was rejected,
for there was no hope that fresh elections could bring together a more royalist House of Commons
than that of 1661. The attitude of the Houses showed in fact that the hottest Royalists had
learned, whether they would or no, the lesson of the Civil War. Whatever might in other ways
be the temper of the Commons who assembled at Westminster, it was certain that the great constitutional
revolution which was slowly removing the control of affairs from the hands of the Crown into
those of the Parliament would go just as steadily on. But if Charles refused to dissolve the
Parliament he longed to free himself from its power; and the mediation of France enabled a
peace congress to assemble at Breda in May 1667. To Holland, eager to free its hands so as
to deal with the French invasion of the Netherlands, an invasion which was now felt to be impending,
peace was yet more important than to England; and a stroke of singular vigour placed peace
within her grasp. Aware of the exhaustion of the English treasury and of the miserable state
of the English navy, the persevering De Witt suddenly ordered the Dutch fleet, sixty vessels
strong, to sail in June to the Thames. England was taken utterly by surprise. Neither ships
nor forts were manned when the Hollanders appeared at the Nore. Pushing their light vessels
without show of opposition up the Thames to Gravesend they forced the boom which protected
the Medway, burned three men-of-war which lay anchored in the river, and withdrew only to sail
proudly along the coast, the masters of the Channel.

[Sidenote: Fall of Clarendon.]

The thunder of the Dutch guns in the Medway and the Thames woke England to a bitter sense of
its degradation. The dream of loyalty was roughly broken. But Oliver's successor was coolly
watching this shame and discontent of his people with the one aim of turning it to his own
advantage. To Charles the Second the degradation of England was only a move in the political
game which he was playing, a game played with so consummate a secrecy and skill that it not
only deceived close observers of his own day but still misleads historians in ours. The blow
at once brought about the peace he desired. Each of the combatants retained what it had won,
save that Holland gained the isle of Polaroon on the Bombay coast, and England the settlement
of New Amsterdam on the Hudson, which was soon to be better known as her colony of New York.
A result still more to the king's taste was the ruin of Clarendon. Clarendon had had no part
in the reduction of the navy which had proved so fatal to English renown, but the public resentment
fell on him alone. The Parliament, enraged by his counsel for its dissolution, saw in his call
for forces to defend the coast an attempt to re-establish the one thing they hated most, a
standing army. Charles could at last free himself from the minister who had held him in check
so long. In August 1667 the Chancellor was dismissed from office, and driven by the express
command of the king to take refuge in France.

CHAPTER II

THE POPISH PLOT

1667-1683

[Sidenote: The Cabal Ministry.]

The fall of Clarendon marks a new epoch in the history of the Restoration. By the exile of
the Chancellor, the death of Lord Southampton, which had preceded, and the retirement of Ormond
and Nicholas which followed it, the constitutional loyalists who had hitherto shaped the policy
of the government disappeared from the royal council. The union between King, Church, and Parliament,
on which their system had been based, was roughly dissolved. The House of Commons, which had
been elected in a passion of loyalty only six years before, found itself thrown into a position
of antagonism to the Crown. The Church saw the most formidable opponent of its supremacy in
the king.

For the first time since his accession Charles came boldly forward to the front of public affairs.
He had freed himself, as he believed, from the domination of the constitutional loyalists and
of the ministers who represented them. The new ministry was mainly made up of that section
of the original ministry of 1660 which then represented the Presbyterians, and which under
Ashley's guidance had bent to purchase toleration even at the cost of increasing the prerogatives
of the Crown. Ashley himself remained Chancellor of the Exchequer. The Duke of Buckingham,
whose marriage with the daughter of Lord Fairfax allied him with the Presbyterians, and who
carried on political relations even with the Independents, held a leading position in the new
Cabinet, though at first without office. Sir William Coventry, a bitter opponent of Clarendon,
took his seat at the Treasury board. The direction of Scotch affairs was left to Lord Lauderdale,
a man of rough and insolent manner but of striking ability, and whose political views coincided
as yet mainly with those of Ashley. Two great posts however were filled by men whose elevation
showed the new part which Charles himself was resolved to take in the task of administration.
Foreign affairs the king determined to take into his own hands: and this was adroitly managed
by the nomination of Henry Bennet, now become Earl of Arlington, as Secretary of State. Bennet
was a man of sense and experience, but he was flexible and unprincipled, he was in heart a
Catholic, and ready to serve as a creature of the royal will. Sir Thomas Clifford, the new
head of the Treasury, was a Catholic by conviction, and ready to sacrifice English freedom
if the sacrifice would bring back England to his faith.

[Sidenote: The Cabal.]

Such was the ministry which from the accidental coincidence of the initial letters of the names
of five of its members with those which make up the word was known as the Cabal. But the word
Cabala, or Cabal, had as yet none of the odious meaning which after events attached to it;
it meant indeed simply what we mean by "cabinet." Nor was there anything in the temper or conduct
of the new ministers which foreboded ill. To all but the king and themselves the Catholic sympathies
of Clifford and Arlington were unknown. The ministry seemed to represent the Presbyterians,
and the Presbyterians as a party were true to the cause of freedom for which they had fought.
Nor did the earlier acts of the "Cabal" belie its origin. Few ministries in fact have shown
at their outset greater vigour or wisdom. Its first work was the Triple Alliance. The warlike
outburst of feeling in the Parliament at the prospect of a struggle with France had warned
the French and English kings that a strife which both desired rather to limit than to widen
must be brought to an end. The dexterous delays of Charles were seconded by the eagerness with
which Lewis pressed on the Peace of Breda between England and the Dutch. To Lewis indeed it
seemed as if the hour he had so long waited for was come. He had secured the neutrality of
the Emperor by a secret treaty which provided for a division of the Spanish dominions between
the two monarchs in case the king of Spain died without an heir. England, as he believed, was
held in check by Charles, and like Holland was too exhausted by the late war to meddle with
a new one. On the very day therefore on which the Treaty of Breda was signed he sent in his
formal claims on the Low Countries, and his army at once took the field. Flanders was occupied
and six great fortresses secured in two months. Franche Comté was overrun in seventeen days.

[Sidenote: English Diplomacy.]

But the suddenness and completeness of the French success woke a general terror before which
the king's skilful diplomacy gave way. Holland, roused to a sense of danger by the appearance
of French arms on the Rhine, protested and appealed to England for aid; and though her appeals
remained at first unanswered, even England was roused from her lethargy by the French seizure
of the coast towns of Flanders. The earlier efforts of English diplomacy indeed were of a selfish
and unscrupulous kind. Holland, Spain, and France were tempted in turn by secret offers of
alliance. A treaty offensive and defensive against all powers for the defence of the Spanish
Netherlands was proposed to the Dutch. Spain was offered alliance and aid in return for the
concession of free trade with her dominions in America and the Philippines. Before France was
laid the project of an offensive and defensive alliance directed especially against Holland,
and perhaps against Spain, in return for which England stipulated for admission to a share
in the eventual partition of the Spanish dominions, and for an assignment to her in such a
case of the Spanish Empire in the New World. Each of these offers was alike refused. Spain
looked on them as insincere. France regarded the terms of alliance as extravagant, while she
was anxious to hold the Dutch to their present friendship and inactivity rather than to stir
them to war. Holland itself, while desirous to check French ambition, still clung to its French
alliance.

[Sidenote: The Triple Alliance.]

Repulsed as they were on every side, the need of action became clearer every hour to the English
ministers. The common refusal of France and the Dutch roused fears that these powers were secretly
leagued for a partition of the Netherlands between them. Wider views too gradually set aside
the narrow dreams of merely national aggrandizement. To Ashley and his followers an increase
of the French power seemed dangerous not only to the European balance of power but to English
Protestantism. Even Arlington, Catholic as in heart he was, thought more of the political interests
of England and of the invariable resolve of its statesmen since Elizabeth's day to keep the
French out of Flanders than of the interests of Catholicism. One course alone remained. To
lull the general excitement Lewis had offered peace to Spain on terms either of the cession
of Franche Comté or of the retention of his conquests in the Netherlands. The plan of John
de Witt, the Pensionary of Holland, was to take France at its word and to force on Spain the
acceptance of these terms by the joint pressure of England and the United Provinces. It was
this plan which England suddenly adopted. In the opening of 1668 Sir William Temple was despatched
to the Hague, and an alliance was concluded between England and Holland, in which Sweden, the
third great Protestant power, was soon included.

Few measures have won a greater popularity than this Triple Alliance. "It is the only good
public thing," says Pepys, "that hath been done since the king came to England." Even Dryden,
writing at the time as a Tory, counted among the worst of Shaftesbury's crimes that "the Triple
Bond he broke." In form indeed the alliance simply bound Lewis to adhere to terms of peace
proposed by himself and those advantageous terms, the possession of the southern half of Flanders
and of a string of fortresses which practically left him master of the Spanish Netherlands.
But in fact it utterly ruined his plans. His offer of peace had been meant only as a blind.
At the moment when Temple reached the Hague Lewis was writing to his general, Turenne, "I am
turning over in my head things that are far from impossible, and go to carry them into execution
whatever they may cost." Three armies were ready to march at once on Spain, Germany, and the
Netherlands, when the intervention of the three powers suddenly arrested these schemes of conquest
and forced Lewis to conclude peace at Aix-la-Chapelle. But the immediate gain was the least
result of the Triple Alliance. It brought about that union of the powers of Europe against
which, as Lewis felt instinctively, his ambition would dash itself in vain. It was Arlington's
aim to make the Alliance the nucleus of a greater confederation: and he tried not only to perpetuate
it but to include within it the Swiss Cantons, the Empire, and the House of Austria. His efforts
were foiled; but the "Triple Bond" bore within it the germs of the Grand Alliance which at
last saved Europe. To England it at once brought back the reputation which she had lost since
the death of Cromwell. It was a sign of her re-entry on the general stage of European politics,
and of her formal adoption of the balance of power as a policy essential to the welfare not
of one or another nation but of Europe at large.

[Sidenote: Lewis and Holland.]

Lewis was maddened by the check. I should like to inquire how she is getting along this cold
weather."

Reynolds obeyed, and soon Lettice found herself in a warm, comfortable breakfast room.

"Good morning," said Mrs. Danvers. "I am sorry you have had such a cold walk this morning. I am
sorry you could not come last night. This young lady is just leaving, and there is barely time to put
up the things." Catherine (for this was the young lady's name,) had her back turned to the
door quietly continuing her breakfast, but when the gentle voice of Lettice replied:

"Indeed, madam, I beg your pardon, I did my very best"--Catherine started, looked up, and rose
hastily from her chair--Lettice, advancing a few steps, exclaimed "Catherine."

And Catherine exclaimed--"It is--it is you!" and coming forward and
taking her by the hand, she gazed with astonishment at the wan face
and the miserable attire of the work-woman.

"You," she kept repeating. "Lettice!

Lettice Arnold! Good Heavens! Where is your father? your mother? your sister?"

"Gone," said the poor girl, "all gone but poor Myra!"

"And where is she? And you, dear Lettice, how have you come to this?"

Such was the unexpected meeting of these two persons, who were once children of the same village
of Castle Rising. Lettice had been working for her school-mate, Catherine Melvin. The result
was a happy one, and it was not long before, by the kindness of Catherine, that the two orphan
girls were situated pleasantly in life. But as you will wish to know how all this came about, I
will give you the circumstances in another story.

THE EXPLANATION.

Lettice's father was a man of education, a scholar, a gentleman, and had much power in preaching.
He received one hundred and ten pounds per year for his services. Her father's illness was long
and painful, and the family were dependant on others for assistance.

"We at last closed his eyes," said Lettice, "in deep sorrow." He used to say to himself, "It
is a rough road, but it leads to a good place."

After his funeral, the expenses exhausted all that was left of their money--only a few pounds
were left when the furniture was sold, and "we were obliged," said Lettice, "to give up the dear
little parsonage. It was a sweet little place. The house was covered all over with honeysuckles
and jessamines; and there was the flower garden in which I used to work, and which made me so hale
and strong, and aunt Montague used to say I was worth a whole bundle of fine ladies.

"It was a sad day when we parted from it. My poor mother! How she kept looking back, striving not
to cry, and poor Myra was drowned in tears.

"Then we afterwards came to London. A person whom we knew in the village had a son who was employed
in one of the great linen warehouses, and he promised to try to get us needlework. So we came to
London, took a small lodging, and furnished it with the remnant of our furniture. Here we worked
fourteen hours a day apiece, and we could only gain between three and four shillings each.
At last mother died, and then all went; she died, and had a pauper's funeral."

From this room the orphan girls removed soon after their mother's decease, and located among
the poor of Marylebone street, where Mrs. Danvers accidentally met with the two sisters, in
one of her visits among the poor, and for whom she obtained the work which led to the unexpected
meeting related in the previous story.

JONAS AND HIS HORSE.

A horse is a noble animal, and is made for the service of man. No one who has tender feelings
can bear to see the horse abused. It is wicked for any one to do so. A horse has a good memory,
and he will never forget a kind master. Jonas Carter is one of those boys who likes to take care
of a horse. His father gave Jonas the whole care of an excellent animal which he purchased for
his own use. Every morning he would go into the stable to feed and
water him.

As all the horses in the neighborhood had names, Jonas gave one to
his, and called him Major.

Every time he went into the stable to take care of him, Major would whine and paw, as if his
best friend was coming to see him. Jonas kept him very clean and nice, so that he was always ready
for use at any time of day. At night he made up his bed of straw, and kept the stable warm in
winter and cool in summer. Major soon found that he was in the hands of a kind master, and being well
fed, and well cleansed, he would often show how proud and nice he was, by playing with Jonas
in the yard. His young master would often let him loose in the yard, and when Jonas started to go
in, the horse, Major, would follow him to the door, and when he turned him into the pasture,
no one could so well catch him as Jonas; for every time he took him from the pasture, Jonas would
give him some oats; so when he saw his master coming for him, he remembered the oats, and would
come directly to him. Some horses are very difficult to bridle, but it was not so with Major. When
Jonas came with the bridle, Major would hold his head down, and take in his bitts, and appear
as docile as a lamb. He well knew that Jonas never drove him hard, but always used him kindly.
Jonas was not a selfish boy; he was willing to let his friends ride a short distance; and
in the picture, you will see him talking with one of his young friends about his horse.

Now, children, you may be sure that a dumb animal will remember his kind master; and if ever
you own a horse, or drive one which belongs to another, be sure and treat him kindly. And you
will find this rule to work well among yourselves. Be kind to each other, and to all whom
you meet with, and it will help you along the pleasant path of life, and secure to you many friends.

EDWARD
AND ELLEN.

Edward Ford owned a snug little cottage with a small farm situated about a mile from the village.
When he was married to Ellen G----, who was said to be one of the best girls in the village,
he took her to his nice little home, where he had every thing around
very pleasant and comfortable.

Ellen was very industrious and remarkable for her prudence and neatness.

She spun and churned, and tended her poultry, and would often carry her butter and eggs herself
to market, which greatly added to their comfort. She had a beautiful-little girl, and they gave
her the name of Lily. Things glided smoothly on until Lily was sixteen. Edward was very fond of the
violin and of reading books that were not very useful, and as he was very fond of music, he spent
a great deal more time in making music and playing the violin than what his wife thought profitable.
Ellen loved music, and was willing to have him read profitable books, but all this while she thought he
might be patching up the fences and improving the shed for the better comfort of the cattle. Still
she would not complain, hoping all the time that he would see the necessity of being a little more
industrious. The winter came, and all through its dreary months he was unable to work, as
he was sick. And although Ellen worked hard, yet her husband required so much of her attention,
that all her efforts availed not much to keep poverty out of their cottage. When the spring came,
Ellen's husband was able to be about again, and she began to hope that Edward would be more
industrious, and they would be able by strict economy to repair the loss occasioned by his
winter's illness, which had put them so far behindhand. Edward had become lazy or disheartened. Affairs
about house continued to grow worse; his farm was ill worked or neglected, and by the fall, his
horse and oxen had to go for necessary expenses. Ellen still kept her cows, but it was now
very little help she received from her husband. He had been formerly one of the most temperate
of men, but now he spent his days from home; and here lay Ellen's deepest sorrow. He was often
at the village tavern, wasting in senseless riot the time, health and means that God had given him
for other purposes. Ellen felt sad, and in the next story you will see a painful scene in the
life of

LILY FORD.

It was now in the latter part of December--two days more and comes the season of "Merry Christmas."
Ellen thought of the dreary prospect before her. As she was thinking over her condition, and how
she should manage affairs so as to make home comfortable, the door
opened, and in came Edward earlier than usual, a sober man.

With a grateful heart Ellen sat about preparing the supper, and made
all the evening as pleasant as she could for him.

The next morning earlier than usual Edward was preparing to go out. The weather was bitter
cold, and the wood pile was very low. She did not like to ask Edward to split some wood the
evening before, as she did not wish to vex him. Of late he had harshly refused her simple requests.
She, however, ventured this morning to ask him to split a few logs, and he replied:

"Why did you not ask me when you saw me doing nothing all last evening? You must get along the best
way you can until night. I have engaged to work for Squire Davis, and I shall be late unless I
go at once."

"To work! Have you?" said Ellen, in a pleased and grateful tone.

"Yes; so don't detain me. I am to have a dollar and a half a day as
long as I choose to work."

"How very fortunate!" said Ellen.

After he was gone, Ellen busied herself in making things comfortable for the children. It was
market day, and she must carry her heavy basket to the village for the different families who depended
upon her for their supply of fresh butter and eggs. A year ago she had a neat little-wagon
and a good horse to drive. There was something in the mind of Ellen, what it was she could
not tell, a kind of sad presentiment of something, as she was preparing to go to market. I
shall tell you in the next story what it was. You will see that Ellen was very kind to her husband,
and tried every way to make him happy.

THE MARKET DAY.

Mrs. Ford had three little children, Lily, Hetty, and a dear little babe. As she was now going
to market, she told Lily, her oldest daughter, to take good care of the baby. Lily promised to
do so. It was a very cold day. For a time the children got along very well; but soon the wood was
all burned, not a stick or chip remained; as their father had gone away in the morning without splitting
any, so they were obliged to do the best they could. The baby began to look as if it was cold,
and Lily said:

"Come, Hetty, we will go out and see if together we cannot roll in one of those great logs."

Hetty
was eleven years old. Lily put the baby in the cradle and then went out with Hetty to roll in
the log. They rolled it up to the step, and got it part way into the door, but, alas! they could
not get it further.

There it stuck in the doorway, and the door was wide open; the wind
and snow beat in from without, and the fire gradually settled away
in its embers.

Something must now be done. Hetty put on her cloak and hood and set out for her mother; for she
told them if anything happened to be sure and come for her. Hetty soon found her mother at
the village store, and without stopping to warm herself, she said:

"O mother, come home, for little Eddy is sick, and Lily says it is the croup, and that he is dying.
The fire is all out, and the room is full of snow, because the big log we tried to roll in stuck
fast in the doorway."

Hetty and her mother hastened home: and as they were crossing the street, there was her husband just
entering the tavern. She told him about little Eddy, and he promised to go for a physician,
and to come home immediately; and by the time they had gone half way home, Edward, her husband,
joined them.

They hurried along, and as they came near the cottage there stood two of the cows, and under the
shed was the third, the old "spotted cow," which Hetty thought was in the pond when she left
home. To their surprise the log was rolled away from the door, and as Mrs. Ford opened the door
with a trembling hand, fearing her baby was dead, there was a young man sitting by a good fire,
which he had made while Hetty was gone, with little Eddy folded in his arms. The anxious mother
bent over her baby as he lay in the stranger's arms, and seeing his eyes closed, she whispered:

"Is
he dead?"

"He is not, he only sleeps," replied the stranger.

This young man came into the house in time to save the baby from the
cold chills of death.

He was ever after a friend to the family--a means of Edward's reformation, so that with some
assistance the mortgage on the farm was paid off, and the farm re-stocked. This stranger became the
husband of Lily, the eldest daughter.

THE TWO MAMMAS.

FOR HENRY AND EDWARD.

'Tis strange to talk of two mammas! Well, come and sit by me, And I will try to tell you how So
strange a thing can be.

Years since you had a dear mamma, So gentle, good and mild, Her Father God looked down from heaven,
And loved his humble child.

Thy first mamma died on board of the vessel which took her from Burmah. At parting--

----She kissed her little boys With white and quivering lip; And while
the tears were falling fast, They bore her to the ship.

And Abby, Pwen, and Enna went-- Oh! it was sad to be Thus parted--three upon the land, And three
upon the sea.

Thy first mamma was buried on a distant rocky isle, where none but strangers rest. The vessel
passed on her voyage, and--
At length they reached a distant shore, A beautiful bright land,
And crowds of pitying strangers came, And took them by the hand.

And
Abby found a pleasant home, And Pwen and Enna too; But poor papa's
sad thoughts turned back To Burmah and to you.

He told me of his
darling boys, Poor orphans far away, With no mamma to kiss their lips,
Or teach them how to pray.

And would I be their new mamma, And join
the little band Of those who, for the Saviour's sake, Dwell in a heathen
land?

Much do I love my darling boys, And much do they love me; Our
Heavenly Father sent me here, Your new mamma to be.

And if I closely
follow Him, And hold your little hands, I hope to lead you up to heaven,
To join the angel bands.

Then with papa and both mammas, And her
who went before, And Christ, who loves you more than all, Ye'll dwell
for ever more.

MRS. JUDSON.

MELLY, ANNA AND SUSY.

There is nothing
more pleasant than to see brothers and sisters, lovely in their lives,
and in all their plays kind and obliging to each other. Mrs. Jones'
three little children were always noted for their good behavior by
all the people in the village, and the school teacher said they were
the prettiest behaved children she ever saw, and this was saying much
in their praise, for her scholars were noted for very good behavior
and promptness in their recitations. Mrs. Jones kept her children
under a good discipline, but she always gave them time and opportunities
for their pleasant plays. She would not allow them to associate with
vicious children, because "evil communications corrupt good manners,"
and she knew her children were as liable to fall into bad habits as
any others. There were a few vicious boys in the village where she
lived who always took delight in teasing and vexing the other children,
and sometimes these boys would try some method to break up the children's
play.

One afternoon, there being no school, Mrs. Jones gave her little
children permission to go into the lower back-room and spend awhile
in play. Away they jumped and skipped along down stairs to the play
room, with merry hearts and smiling faces. They had not been there
a long time before they heard a very singular noise, which they did
not know what to make of. But they soon forgot it, and continued playing
with the same cheerfulness; very soon again they heard the same noise,
which sounded like somebody's voice. The children began to be a little
frightened, and you will see them in the picture standing "stock still,"
while little Susy stretches her hand out to take hold of the post,
and is in the act of running away. Molly and Anna put their fingers
to their lips, and listened again to know what the noise could mean.
Soon the noise was repeated, and away they flew to their mother's
arms in such a tremor that she felt at the moment alarmed herself.
They told their mother what had happened, and all that night the children
could not sleep.

It was ascertained the next day that one of the
bad boys crept along in the back part of the yard where the children
were playing, and by an unnatural sound of his voice made the noise
that so alarmed the three little children. Susy, who was the youngest,
did not forget it for sometime; and all of them were afraid to go
alone into the lower room for many weeks.

This was very wrong in
the bad boy; he might have injured the children at play so they would
never have recovered from it. I have known young children to be so
frightened as never to forget the impression all their life-time.
How much better for the boy to have been like these good children,
and joined with them in their pleasant pastimes. Never do any thing
that will give sorrow and pain to others, but live and act towards
each other while in youth, so as to enable you to review your life
with pleasure, and to meet with the approbation of your Heavenly Father.

ARTHUR
AND HIS APPLE TREE.

One summer day little William was sitting in
the garden chair beside his mother, under the shade of a large cherry
tree which stood on the grass plot in front of the house. He was reading
in a little book. After he had been reading sometime, he looked up
to his mother, and said:

"Mother, will you tell me what is the meaning
of 'you must return good for evil?'"

His mother replied: "I will
tell you a story that will explain it. His refusal to promise to abstain from preaching kept him there eleven years.
The gaol was crowded with prisoners like himself, and amongst them he continued his ministry,
supporting himself by making tagged thread laces, and finding some comfort in the Bible, the
"Book of Martyrs," and the writing materials which he was suffered to have with him in his
prison. But he was in the prime of life; his age was thirty-two when he was imprisoned; and
the inactivity and severance from his wife and little children were hard to bear. It was in
his gaol that he wrote the first and greatest part of his "Pilgrim's Progress."

[Sidenote: The "Pilgrim's Progress."]

The book had only just been completed when the Indulgence set Bunyan free. Its publication
was the earliest result indeed of his deliverance, and the popularity which it enjoyed from
the first proves that the religious sympathies of the English people were still mainly Puritan.
Before Bunyan's death in 1688 ten editions of the "Pilgrim's Progress" had already been sold;
and though even Cowper hardly dared to quote it a century later for fear of moving a smile
in the polite world about him, its favour among the middle classes and the poor has grown steadily
from its author's day to our own. It is now the most popular and the most widely known of all
English books. In none do we see more clearly the new imaginative force which had been given
to the common life of Englishmen by their study of the Bible. He has lived among its visions
and voices of heaven till all sense of possible unreality has died away. He tells his tale
with such a perfect naturalness that allegories become living things, that the Slough of Despond
and Doubting Castle are as real to us as places we see every day, that we know Mr. Legality
and Mr. Worldly Wiseman as if we had met them in the street. It is in this amazing reality
of impersonation that Bunyan's imaginative genius specially displays itself. But this is far
from being his only excellence. In its range, in its directness, in its simple grace, in the
ease with which it changes from lively dialogue to dramatic action, from simple pathos to passionate
earnestness, in the subtle and delicate fancy which often suffuses its childlike words, in
its playful humour, its bold character-painting, in the even and balanced power which passes
without effort from the Valley of the Shadow of Death to the land "where the Shining Ones commonly
walked because it was on the borders of heaven," in its sunny kindliness unbroken by one bitter
word, the "Pilgrim's Progress" is among the noblest of English poems. For if Puritanism had
first discovered the poetry which contact with the spiritual world awakes in the meanest souls,
Bunyan was the first of the Puritans who revealed this poetry to the outer world. The journey
of Christian from the City of Destruction to the Heavenly City is simply a record of the life
of such a Puritan as Bunyan himself, seen through an imaginative haze of spiritual idealism
in which its commonest incidents are heightened and glorified. He is himself the pilgrim who
flies from the City of Destruction, who climbs the hill Difficulty, who faces Apollyon, who
sees his loved ones cross the river of Death towards the Heavenly City, and how, because "the
Hill on which the City was framed was higher than the clouds, they therefore went up through
the region of the air, sweetly talking as they went."

[Sidenote: The attack on Holland.]

Great, however, as was the relief of the Indulgence to men like Bunyan, it was difficult to
wring from the bulk of the Nonconformists any expression of gratitude or satisfaction. Dear
as toleration was to them, the general interests of religion were dearer, and not only these
but national freedom was now at stake. Holland, the bulwark of Protestantism abroad, seemed
to crumble into ruin at the first blow of France. Lewis passed the Rhine on the twelfth of
June, and overran three of the States without opposition. It was only by skill and desperate
courage that the Dutch ships under De Ruyter held the English fleet under the Duke of York
at bay in an obstinate battle off the coast of Suffolk. Till almost the eve of the struggle,
in fact, the Dutch had been wrapt in a false security. The French alliance had been their traditional
policy since the days of Henry the Fourth, and it was especially dear to the great merchant
class which had mounted to power on the fall of the House of Orange. John de Witt, the leader
of this party, though he had been forced to conclude the Triple Alliance by the previous advance
of Lewis to the Rhine, had expressly refused to join England in an attack on France, and still
clung blindly to her friendship. His trust only broke down when the glare of the French watch-fires
was seen from the walls of Amsterdam.

[Sidenote: The Prince of Orange.]

For the moment Holland lay crushed at the feet of Lewis, but the arrogant demands of the conqueror
roused again the stubborn courage which had wrested victory from Alva and worn out the pride
of Philip the Second. De Witt was murdered in a popular tumult, and his fall called William,
the Prince of Orange, to the head of the Republic. The new Stadtholder had hardly reached manhood;
but he had no sooner taken the lead in public affairs than his great qualities made themselves
felt. His earlier life had schooled him in a wonderful self-control. He had been left fatherless
and all but friendless in childhood; he had been bred among men who regarded his very existence
as a danger to the State; his words had been watched, his looks noted, his friends jealously
withdrawn. In such an atmosphere the boy grew up silent, wary, self-contained, grave in temper,
cold in demeanour, blunt and even repulsive in address. He was weak and sickly from his cradle,
and manhood brought with it an asthma and consumption which shook his frame with a constant
cough; his face was sullen and bloodless, and scored with deep lines which told of ceaseless
pain. But beneath this cold and sickly presence lay a fiery and commanding temper, an immovable
courage, and a political ability of the highest order. William was a born statesman. Neglected
as his education had been in other ways, for he knew nothing of letters or of art, he had been
carefully trained in politics by John de Witt; and the wide knowledge with which in his first
address to the States-General the young Stadtholder reviewed the general state of Europe, the
sagacity with which he calculated the chances of the struggle, at once won him the trust of
his countrymen.

[Sidenote: William and the French Invasion.]

Their trust was soon rewarded. The plot of the two courts hung for its success on the chances
of a rapid surprise, and with the approach of winter, a season in which military operations
were then suspended, all chance of a surprise was over. William rapidly turned the respite
to good account. Young as he was, he displayed from the first the cool courage and dogged tenacity
of his race. "Do you not see your country is lost?" asked the Duke of Buckingham when he was
sent to negotiate at the Hague. "There is a sure way never to see it lost," replied William,
"and that is to die in the last ditch." With the spring of 1673 the tide began to turn. Holland
was saved, and province after province won back from the arms of France by William's dauntless
resolve. Like his great ancestor, William the Silent, he was a luckless commander, and no general
had to bear more frequent defeats. But he profited by defeat as other men profit by victory.
His bravery indeed was of that nobler cast which rises to its height in moments of ruin and
dismay. The coolness with which, boy-general as he was, he rallied his broken squadrons amidst
the rout of Seneff and wrested from Condé at the last the fruits of his victory moved his veteran
opponent to a generous admiration. It was at such moments indeed that the real temper of the
man broke through the veil of his usual reserve. A strange light flashed from his eyes as soon
as he was under fire; and in the terror and confusion of defeat his cold and repulsive manner
was thrown aside for an ease and gaiety which charmed every soldier around him.

[Sidenote: Parliament and the War.]

The gallant struggle of the prince was hardly needed to win the sympathies of Englishmen to
the cause of the Dutch. In the exultation of the first moment of triumph Charles had lavished
honours on the leaders of both the parties in his cabinet. Clifford became Lord Treasurer,
Ashley was made Chancellor and raised to the earldom of Shaftesbury. But the dream of triumph
soon passed away. The Duke of York had owned at the outset of the war that recourse could only
be had to Parliament when success had put Charles in a position "to obtain by force what he
could not get by pleasanter ways." But the delay of winter exhausted the supplies which had
been procured so unscrupulously, while the closing of the Treasury had shaken credit and rendered
it impossible to raise a loan. It was necessary therefore in 1673, though the success Charles
had counted on was still delayed, to appeal to the Commons. But the Commons met in a mood of
angry distrust. The war, unpopular as it was, they left alone. What overpowered all other feelings
was a vague sense, which we know now to have been justified by the facts, that liberty and
religion were being unscrupulously betrayed. There was a suspicion that the whole armed force
of the nation was in Catholic hands. The Duke of York was suspected of being in heart a Catholic,
and he was in command of the fleet. Catholics had been placed as officers in the land force
which was being raised for a descent upon Holland. Lady Castlemaine, the king's mistress, paraded
her change of faith; and doubts were fast gathering over the Protestantism of the king. There
was a general dread that a plot was on foot for the establishment of Catholicism and despotism,
and that the war and the Indulgence were parts of the plot.

[Sidenote: The Test Act.]

The change of temper in the Commons was marked by the appearance of what was from that time
called the Country party with Lord Russell, Lord Cavendish, and Sir William Coventry at its
head, a party which sympathized with the desire of the Nonconformists for religious toleration,
but looked on it as its first duty to guard against the political and religious designs of
the Court. The House listened unmoved to the fiery address of the new Lord Chancellor in favour
of the war, an address which ended with the phrase, "Delenda est Carthago," so often quoted
against him afterwards, as they listened unmoved to the king's declaration of his steady adherence
to the Indulgence. "I shall take it very ill," said Charles, with unusual haughtiness, "to
receive contradiction in what I have done; and, I will deal plainly with you, I am resolved
to stick to my declaration." As to the Declaration of Indulgence, however, all parties in the
House were at one. The Commons resolved "that penal statutes in matters ecclesiastical cannot
be suspended but by consent of Parliament," and refused supplies till the Declaration was recalled.
The king yielded after long hesitation, for the grant of supplies was still before the House
and France counselled compliance. But the Declaration was no sooner recalled than the Parliament
passed from considerations of the past to provisions for the future. A Test Act was passed
through both Houses without opposition, which required that every one in the civil and military
employment of the State should take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, subscribe a declaration
against transubstantiation, and receive the sacrament according to the rites of the Church
of England. It was known that the dissidents were prepared to waive all objection either to
oath or sacrament, and the result of the Bill therefore was to bring Protestants, if not to
union, yet a step nearer to one another. Catholics, on the other hand, were wholly excluded
from all share in the government of the State. The Act was fatal to the king's schemes, and
Clifford at once counselled resistance while Buckingham talked flightily about bringing the
army to London. But the grant of a subsidy was still held in suspense till the Test was accepted:
and Arlington, who saw that all hope of carrying the "great plan" through was at an end and
looked to the Test as a means of freeing himself from Clifford's rivalry in the cabinet, pressed
Charles to yield. A dissolution in fact was the king's only resource, but in the temper of
the nation a new Parliament would have been yet more violent than the present one. Charles
therefore sullenly gave his assent to the Bill.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury.]

Few measures have ever brought about more startling results than the Test Act. It was no sooner
passed than the Duke of York owned himself a Catholic and resigned his office as Lord High
Admiral. Throngs of excited people gathered round the Lord Treasurer's house at the news that
Clifford too had owned to being a Catholic and had laid down his staff of office. Their resignation
was followed by that of hundreds of others in the army and the civil service of the Crown.
On public opinion the effect of these discoveries was wonderful. "I dare not write all the
strange talk of the town," says Evelyn. The resignations were held to have proved the existence
of the dangers which the Test had been framed to meet. From this moment all trust in Charles
was at an end. "The king," Shaftesbury said bitterly, "who if he had been so happy as to have
been born a private gentleman had certainly passed for a man of good parts, excellent breeding,
and well natured, hath now, being a Prince, brought his affairs to that pass that there is
not a person in the world, man or woman, that dares rely upon him or put any confidence in
his word or friendship." The one man in England indeed on whom the discovery of the king's
perfidy fell with the most crushing effect was Shaftesbury himself. Ashley Cooper had piqued
himself on a penetration which read the characters of men around him and on a political instinct
which discerned every coming change. He had bought, as he believed, the Declaration of Indulgence,
the release of the imprisoned Nonconformists, and freedom of worship for all dissidents, at
the price of a consent to the second attack on Holland; and he was looked on by the public
at large as the minister most responsible both for the measures he advised and the measures
he had nothing to do with. But while facing the gathering storm of unpopularity, Ashley learnt
in a moment of drunken confidence the secret of the king's religion. He owned to a friend "his
trouble at the black cloud which was gathering over England"; but troubled as he was he still
believed himself strong enough to use Charles for his own purposes. His acceptance of the Chancellorship
and of the earldom of Shaftesbury, as well as his violent defence of the war on opening the
Parliament, identified him yet more with the royal policy. It was after the opening of the
Parliament, if we credit the statement of the French Ambassador, a statement which squares
with the sudden change in his course, that he learnt from Arlington, who desired to secure
his help in driving Clifford from the royal councils, the secret of the Treaty of Dover.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury's change of Policy.]

Whether this was so, or whether suspicion as in the people at large deepened into certainty,
Shaftesbury saw he had been duped. To the bitterness of such a discovery was added the bitterness
of having aided in schemes which he abhorred. His change of policy was rapid and complete.
He pressed in the royal council for the withdrawal of the Declaration of Indulgence. In Parliament
he supported the Test Act with extraordinary vehemence. But he was far from any thought of
resigning his post. He clung to it in fact more tenaciously than ever, for the displacement
of James and Clifford by the test left him, as he thought, dominant in the royal council, and
gave him hopes of revenging the deceit which had been practised on him by forcing his policy
on the king. He was resolved to end the war. He had dreams of meeting the danger of a Catholic
successor by a dissolution of the king's marriage with Catharine and by a fresh match with
a Protestant princess. For the moment indeed Charles was helpless. He found himself, as he
had told Lewis long before, alone in his realm. The Test Act had been passed unanimously by
both Houses. Even the Nonconformists deserted him and preferred persecution to the support
of his plans. The dismissal of the Catholic officers made the employment of force, if he ever
contemplated it, impossible, while the ill success of the Dutch war robbed him of all hope
of aid from France. The firmness of the Prince of Orange had roused the stubborn energy of
his countrymen; the French conquests on land were slowly won back; and at sea the fleet of
the allies was still held in check by the fine seamanship of De Ruyter. Nor was William less
successful in diplomacy than in war. The House of Austria was at last stirred to action by
the danger which threatened Europe; and its union with the United Provinces laid the foundation
of the Grand Alliance.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury's dismissal.]

Charles indeed was still firm to continue the war. He had gathered an army on the coast for
a descent upon Holland, and he again sent his fleet to sea under Prince Rupert to clear the
way for its landing. But the gallantry and seamanship of Tromp forced Rupert to withdraw after
an indecisive engagement, and the descent on the Dutch coast had become impossible when the
Parliament again met in October. The House was resolved upon peace, and Shaftesbury was as
determined to end the war as the House itself. It was for this purpose that he threw himself
into hearty alliance with the Country party in the Commons and welcomed the Duke of Ormond
and Prince Rupert, who were looked upon as "great Parliament men," back to the royal council.
It was to Shaftesbury's influence that Charles attributed the dislike which the Commons displayed
to the war and their refusal of a grant of supplies for it until fresh religious securities
were devised. It was at his instigation that an address was presented by both Houses at the
end of 1673 against the plan of marrying James to a Catholic princess, Mary of Modena, a plan
which as James was still without a male heir promised to secure the succession, should a son
be the result of the marriage, in a Catholic line. But Charles was not yet inclined to play
the part of a mere puppet in other men's hands, and the projects of Shaftesbury were suddenly
interrupted by an unexpected act of vigour on the part of the king. The Houses were prorogued
in November, and the Chancellor was ordered to deliver up the Seals.

[Sidenote: The Public Panic.]

"It is only laying down my gown and buckling on my sword," Shaftesbury is said to have replied
to the royal bidding; and though the words were innocent enough, for the sword was part of
the usual dress of a gentleman which he must necessarily resume when he laid aside the gown
of the Chancellor, they were taken as conveying a covert threat. He was still determined to
force on the king a peace with the States. But he looked forward to the dangers of the future
with even greater anxiety than to those of the present. The Duke of York, the successor to
the throne, had owned himself a Catholic; and almost every one agreed that securities for the
national religion would be necessary in the case of his accession. But Shaftesbury saw, and
it is his especial merit that he did see, that with a king like James, convinced of his Divine
Right and bigoted in his religious fervour, securities were valueless. From the first he determined
to force on Charles his brother's exclusion from the throne, and his resolve was justified
by the Revolution, which finally did the work he proposed to do. Unhappily he was equally determined
to fight Charles with weapons as vile as his own. The result of Clifford's resignation, of
James's acknowledgement of his conversion, had been to destroy all belief in the honesty of
public men. A panic of distrust had begun. The fatal truth was whispered that Charles himself
was a Catholic. In spite of the Test Act it was suspected that men Catholics in heart still
held high office in the State, and we know that in Arlington's case the suspicion was just.
Shaftesbury seized on this public alarm, stirred above all by a sense of inability to meet
the secret dangers which day after day was disclosing, as the means of carrying out his plans.
He began fanning the panic by tales of a Papist rising in London and of a coming Irish revolt
with a French army to back it. He retired to his house in the City to find security against
a conspiracy which had been formed, he said, to cut his throat. Meanwhile he rapidly organized
the Country party in the Parliament and placed himself openly at its head. An address for the
removal of ministers "popishly affected or otherwise obnoxious or dangerous" was presented
on the reassembling of the Houses in 1674. The Lower House called on the king to dismiss Lauderdale,
Buckingham, and Arlington, and to disband the troops he had raised since 1664. A bill was brought
in to prevent all Catholics from approaching the Court, in other words for removing James from
the king's Councils. A far more important bill was that of the Protestant Securities which
was pressed by Shaftesbury, Halifax, and Carlisle, the leaders of the new Opposition in the
House of Lords, a bill which enacted that any prince of the blood should forfeit his right
to the Crown on his marriage with a Catholic.

[Sidenote: Peace with Holland.]

The bill, which was the first sketch of the later Exclusion Bill, failed to pass, but its failure
left the Houses excited and alarmed. Shaftesbury intrigued busily in the City, corresponded
with William of Orange, and pressed for a war with France which Charles could only avert by
an appeal to Lewis, a subsidy from whom enabled him to prorogue the Parliament. But Charles
saw that the time had come to give way. Spain was now joining Holland, and a war with Spain
would have deprived English merchants of their most lucrative branch of commerce. The refusal
of supplies by the Commons hastened the king's resolve. "Things have turned out ill," he said
to Temple with a burst of unusual petulance, "but had I been well served I might have made
a good business of it." His concessions however were as usual complete. He dismissed Buckingham
and Arlington from office. He made peace with the Dutch. But Charles was never more formidable
than in the moment of defeat, and he had already determined on a new policy by which the efforts
of Shaftesbury and the Country party might be held at bay. Ever since the opening of his reign
he had clung to a system of balance, had pitted Churchman against Nonconformist and Ashley
against Clarendon, partly to preserve his own independence and partly with a view of winning
some advantage to the Catholics from the political strife. The temper of the Commons had enabled
Clarendon to baffle the king's attempts; and on his fall Charles felt strong enough to abandon
the attempt to preserve a political balance and had sought to carry out his designs with the
single support of the Nonconformists. But the new policy had broken down like the old. The
Nonconformists refused to betray the cause of Protestantism, and Shaftesbury, their leader,
was pressing on measures which would rob Catholicism of the hopes it had gained from the conversion
of James. In straits like these Charles resolved to win back the Commons by boldly adopting
the policy on which the House was set.

[Sidenote: Danby.]

The majority of its members were still a mass of Cavalier Churchmen, who regarded Sir Thomas
Osborne, a dependant of Arlington's, as their representative in the royal councils. The king
had already created Osborne Earl of Danby and raised him to the post of Lord Treasurer in Clifford's
room. In 1674 he frankly adopted the policy of Danby and of his party in the Parliament. The
policy of Danby was in the main that of Clarendon. He had all Clarendon's love of the Church,
his equal hatred of Popery and Dissent, his high notions of the prerogative tempered by a faith
in Parliament and the law. His policy rested like Clarendon's on a union between the king and
the two Houses. He was a staunch Protestant, and his English pride revolted against any schemes
which involved dependence on France. But he was a staunch Royalist. He wished for a French
war, but he would not force the king to fight France against his will. His terror of Popery
failed to win him over to any plans for a change in the succession. The first efforts indeed
of the king and his minister were directed to strengthen James's position by measures which
would allay the popular panic. Mary, the Duke's eldest child and after him the presumptive
heir to the Crown, was confirmed by the royal order as a Protestant. It was through Mary indeed
that Charles aimed at securing the Prince of Orange. The popularity of William throughout the
Protestant world was great; and in England, as the terror of a Popish king increased, men remembered
that were James and his house excluded from the throne William as the king's nephew, the son
of his sister Mary and the grandson of Charles the First, stood next in succession to the Crown.
The Prince was drawn by his desire to detach England from the French alliance into close connexion
with Shaftesbury and the leaders of the Country party, and already pledges from this quarter
had reached him that he should be declared heir to the throne. It was to meet this danger that
Charles resolved to offer William the hand of the Duke's daughter, Mary. Such a marriage secured
James against the one formidable rival to his claims, while it opened to William a far safer
chance of mounting the throne at his father-in-law's death in right of his wife. The prospect
too of such a Protestant succession might well allay much of the panic which was spreading
through the country as men looked forward to the accession of a Catholic king.

[Sidenote: Danby and the Commons.]

The secret negotiations for this marriage which began at the close of 1674 were accompanied
by conferences between Danby and the bishops which restored the union between the Church and
the Crown. The first fruits of this agreement were seen in the rigorous enforcement of the
law against conventicles and the exclusion of all Catholics from Court; while the Parliament
which reassembled in 1675 was assured that the Test Act should be rigorously enforced. The
change in the royal policy came not a moment too soon. As it was the aid of the Cavalier party
which rallied round Danby hardly saved the king from the humiliation of being forced to recall
the troops he still maintained in the French service. To gain a majority on this point Danby
was forced to avail himself of a resource which from this time played for nearly a hundred
years an important part in English politics. Every hour showed more clearly how fatal to its
healthy working was the abandonment of the reforms which the Long Parliament and Cromwell had
introduced into the composition of the House of Commons. The influence of that House was growing
greater and greater on public affairs. In spite of the king's vigorous resistance it was reviewing
expenditure, dictating its own policy in Church and State, checking the royal action even in
foreign affairs, denouncing ministers and driving them from office, meddling now even with
the succession to the Crown. It did this as representing the people, and yet the people could
hardly be said to be represented. The counties alone really returned their own members, and
in the counties the franchise was limited to freeholders. In all but the larger towns the nomination
of members lay in the hands of close corporations. A large number of so-called boroughs had
ceased to have any real existence at all. Their representatives were simply nominees of the
Crown or of neighbouring landowners.

[Sidenote: Policy of corruption and persecution.]

On great questions so imperfect a composition of the representative body mattered indeed little,
for whatever were their origin the members shared in the general national feeling and expressed
fairly the national sentiment. But in the common business of Parliament and in questions of
detail it told fatally on the temper of the House. The members were conscious of their power,
but they were checked by little sense of responsibility for its exercise. They were open therefore
to the meanest and most selfish influences. Charles had done much by "closeting" them. Danby,
bolder and less ingenious, trusted to coarser means. With him began the system of direct bribery
which was to culminate in the Parliamentary corruption of the Pelhams. He was more successful
in winning back the majority of the Commons from their alliance with the Country party by reviving
the old spirit of religious persecution. With the view of breaking up the growing union between
the Churchmen and the Nonconformists as well as of driving from Parliament the Presbyterian
members who formed the strength of the Country party, and whose numbers increased as time brought
fresh elections, he proposed that the test which had been imposed by Clarendon on municipal
officers should be extended to all functionaries of the State, that every member of either
House, every magistrate and public officer, should swear never to take arms against the king
or to "endeavour any alteration of the Protestant religion now established by law in the Church
of England, or any alteration in the Government in Church and State as it is by law established."
The Bill was forced through the Lords by the bishops and the Cavalier party, and its passage
through the Commons was only averted by a quarrel on privilege between the two Houses which
Shaftesbury dexterously fanned into flame.

[Sidenote: Charles turns to France.]

On the other hand the Country party remained strong enough to hamper their grant of supplies
with conditions which rendered it unacceptable to the king. Eager as they were for the war
with France which Danby promised, the Commons could not trust the king; and Danby was soon
to discover how wise their distrust had been. For the Houses were no sooner prorogued in November
1675 than Charles revealed to him the negotiations he had been all the while carrying on with
Lewis. To France, hard pressed as she was by the allies, the entry of England into the war
would have been ruinous; and Lewis was eager to avert this danger by promising Charles a subsidy
should the Parliament strive to force on him a war policy by refusing or limiting supplies.
Charles, who still looked to France for aid in his plans and who believed war would deliver
him helplessly into the power of the Parliament, was as ready to accept the money as Lewis
to give it. At this juncture therefore he called on Danby to sign a treaty by which, on consideration
of a yearly pension guaranteed on the part of France, the two sovereigns bound themselves to
enter into no engagements with other powers, and to lend each other aid in case of rebellion
in their dominions. Such a treaty not only bound England to dependence on France, but freed
the king from all Parliamentary control. But his minister pleaded in vain for delay and for
the advice of the Council. Charles answered his entreaties by signing the treaty with his own hand.

[Sidenote: Danby's measures.]

Danby found himself duped by the king as Shaftesbury had found himself duped; but his bold
temper was only spurred to fresh plans for rescuing the king from his bondage to Lewis. To
do this the first step was fully to reconcile the king and the Parliament, which met again
in February 1677 after a prorogation of fifteen months. The Country party stood in the way
of such a reconciliation, but Danby resolved to break its strength by measures of unscrupulous
vigour for which a blunder of Shaftesbury's gave an opportunity. Shaftesbury despaired of bringing
the House of Commons, elected as it had been fifteen years before in a moment of religious
and political reaction, to any steady opposition to the Crown. He had already moved an address
for its dissolution; and he now urged that as a statute of Edward the Third ordained that Parliaments
should be held "once a year or oftener if need be" the Parliament by the recent prorogation
of a year and a half had ceased legally to exist. The Triennial Act deprived such an argument
of any force, and its only effect was to place the Country party in an injudicious position
of general hostility to the existing Parliament. But Danby represented it as a contempt of
the House, and the Lords at his bidding committed its supporters, Shaftesbury, Buckingham,
Salisbury, and Wharton, to the Tower. While the Opposition cowered under the blow Danby pushed
on a measure which was designed to win back alarmed Churchmen to confidence in the Crown. The
terror of a Catholic successor grew steadily throughout the country, and it was to meet this
terror that Danby devised his Bill for the security of the Church. By this Bill it was provided
that on the succession of any king who was not a member of the Established Church the appointment
of bishops should be vested in the existing body of prelates, and that the king's children
should be placed in the guardianship of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

[Sidenote: The cry for War.]

The bill however failed in the Commons; and a grant of supply unchecked by the appropriation
of the money to special services, a limitation which Charles steadily opposed, was only obtained
by Danby's profuse bribery. The progress of the war abroad indeed was rousing panic in England
faster than Danby could allay it. New successes of the French arms in Flanders and a defeat
of the Prince of Orange at Cassel stirred the whole country to a cry for war. The two Houses
united in an address to the Crown which prayed that England might enter into the Great Alliance
that William had built up, but Charles parried the blow by demanding a supply before the war
was declared and by a new prorogation of the House on a new refusal. Fresh and larger subsidies
from France enabled him to continue this prorogation for seven months. But the silence of the
Parliament did little to silence the country; and Danby took advantage of the popular cry for
war to press an energetic course of action on the king. In its will to check French aggression
the Cavalier party was as earnest as the Puritan, and Danby aimed at redeeming his failure
at home by uniting the Parliament through a vigorous policy abroad.

[Sidenote: Marriage of William and Mary.]

As usual Charles appeared to give way. He was himself for the moment uneasy at the appearance
of the French on the Flemish coast, and he owned that "he could never live at ease with his
subjects" if Flanders were abandoned. He allowed Danby therefore to press on both parties the
necessity for mutual concessions, and to define the new attitude of England by reviving the
project for a match between Mary and William of Orange. William's distrust of Arlington, by
whom the proposal of it had been made to him, had led the Prince at first to set aside the
scheme. But he had never lost sight of it, and the counsels of Sir William Temple had brought
him in 1677 to make overtures for its realization. Charles and Danby had still the same reasons
for desiring it, and the marriage took place on William's visit to England in September. As
the king was childless and James had no son Mary was presumptive heiress of the Crown. The
marriage therefore promised a close political union in the future with Holland, and a corresponding
opposition to the ambition of France. With the country it was popular as a Protestant match
and as ensuring a Protestant successor to James. But Lewis was bitterly angered; he rejected
the English propositions of peace and again sent his army into the field. Danby was ready to
accept the challenge. The withdrawal of the English ambassador from Paris was followed in 1678
by an assembly of the Parliament; a warlike speech from the throne was answered by a warlike
address from the House, large supplies were voted and an army raised.

[Sidenote: Peace of Nimeguen.]

But the actual declaration of war still failed to appear; indeed Charles was in heart as disinclined
for war as ever. While Danby threatened France the king was busy turning the threat to his
own profit, and gaining time by prorogations for a series of base negotiations. At one stage
he demanded from Lewis a fresh pension for the next three years as the price of his good offices
with the allies. Danby stooped to write the demand, and Charles added "This letter is written
by my order, C. R." A force of three thousand English soldiers was landed at Ostend; but the
allies were already broken by their suspicions of the king's real policy, and Charles soon
agreed for a fresh pension to recall the brigade. The bargain was hardly struck when Lewis
withdrew the terms of peace he had himself offered and on the faith of which England had ostensibly
retired from the scene. Once more Danby offered aid to the allies. But all faith in England
had now disappeared. One hostile power after another gave assent to the new conditions laid
down by France, and though Holland, the original cause of the war, was saved, the Peace of
Nimeguen in July 1678 made Lewis the arbiter of Europe.

[Sidenote: The Catholic hopes.]

Disgraceful as the peace was to England, it left Charles the master of a force of twenty thousand
men levied for a war he had refused to declare. It left him too with nearly a million of French
money in his pocket. His course had roused into fresh life the old suspicions of his perfidy
and of a secret plot with Lewis for the ruin of English freedom and of English religion. That
there was such a plot we know; and from the moment of the Treaty of Dover the hopes of the
Catholic party had mounted even faster than the panic of the Protestants. But they had been
bitterly disappointed by the king's sudden withdrawal from the prosecution of his schemes after
his four years' ineffectual struggle, and roused to wild anger by his seeming return to the
policy of Clarendon. Their anger and disappointment were revealed in the letters from English
Jesuits which were afterwards to play so fatal a part in begetting a belief in the plot, and
in the correspondence of Coleman. Coleman was secretary of the Duchess of York and a busy intriguer,
who had gained sufficient knowledge of the real plans of the king and of his brother to warrant
him in begging money from Lewis for the work of saving Catholic interests from Danby's hostility
by intrigues in the Parliament. A passage from one of his letters gives us a glimpse of the
wild dreams which were stirring among the hotter Catholics of the time. "They had a mighty
work on their hands," he wrote, "no less than the conversion of three kingdoms, and by that
perhaps the utter subduing of a pestilent heresy which had so long domineered over a great
part of the northern world. Success would give the greatest blow to the Protestant religion
that it had received since its birth." But while the despair of the Catholic party was unknown
their previous attitude of confidence had stirred suspicions in the public mind which mounted
into alarm when the Peace of Nimeguen suddenly left Charles master--as it seemed--of the position,
and it was of this general panic that one of the vile impostors who are always thrown to the
surface at times of great public agitation was ready to take advantage by the invention of
a Popish plot.

[Sidenote: Titus Oates.]

Titus Oates, a Baptist minister before the Restoration, a curate and navy chaplain after it,
but left penniless by his infamous repute, had sought bread in a conversion to Catholicism,
and had been received into Jesuit houses at Valladolid and St. Omer. While he remained there
he learnt the fact of a secret meeting of the Jesuits in London which was probably nothing
but the usual congregation of the order, and on his expulsion for misconduct this single fact
widened in his fertile brain into a plot for the subversion of Protestantism and the death
of the king. His story was laid before Charles in the August of 1678 and received, as was natural
enough, with the cool incredulity of one who knew what plot there really had been; but Oates
made affidavit of its truth before a London magistrate, Sir Edmondsbury Godfrey, and at last
managed to appear before the Council. He declared that he had been trusted with letters which
disclosed the Jesuit plans. They were stirring rebellion in Ireland; in Scotland they disguised
themselves as Cameronians; in England their aim was to assassinate the king and to leave the
throne open to the Papist Duke of York. The extracts from Jesuit letters, however, which he
produced, though they showed the bitter disappointment and anger of their writers at the king's
withdrawal from his schemes, threw no light on the monstrous charges of a plot for his assassination.
Oates would have been dismissed indeed with contempt but for the seizure of Coleman's correspondence.
The letters of this intriguer, believed as he was to be in the confidence of the Duke of York,
gave a new colour to the plot. Danby himself, conscious of the truth that there really were
designs which Charles dared not avow, was shaken in his rejection of the disclosures and inclined
to use them as weapons to check the king in his Catholic policy. But a more dexterous hand
had already seized on the growing panic. Lord Shaftesbury, released after a long imprisonment
from the Tower, ready since his discovery of the Treaty of Dover to believe in any conspiracy
between the Catholics and the king, and hopeless of foiling the king's policy in any other
way, threw himself into the plot. "Let the Treasurer cry as loud as he pleases against Popery,"
he laughed, "I will cry a note louder." But no cry was needed to heighten the popular frenzy
from the moment when Sir Edmondsbury Godfrey, the magistrate before whom Oates had laid his
information, was found in a field near London with his sword run through his heart. His death
was assumed to be murder, and the murder to be an attempt of the Jesuits to "stifle the plot."
A solemn funeral added to the public agitation; and the two Houses named committees to investigate
the charges made by Oates.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury and the Plot.]

In this investigation Shaftesbury took the lead. Whatever his personal ambition may have been,
his public aims in all that followed were wise and far-sighted. He aimed at forcing Charles
to dissolve the Parliament and appeal again to the nation. He aimed at driving Danby out of
office and at forcing on Charles a ministry which should break his dependence on France and
give a constitutional turn to his policy. He saw that no security would really avail to meet
the danger of a Catholic sovereign, and he aimed at excluding James from the throne. But in
pursuing these aims he threw himself from that moment wholly on the plot. He fanned the popular
panic by accepting without question some fresh depositions in which Oates charged five Catholic
peers with part in the Jesuit conspiracy. Two of these five, Lords Arundell and Bellasys, had
in fact taken part in the preliminary conference which led to the Treaty of Dover. Of this
nothing was known, but the five were sent to the Tower and two thousand suspected persons were
hurried to prison. A proclamation ordered every Catholic to leave London. The train-bands were
called to arms, and patrols paraded through the streets to guard against the Catholic rising
which Oates declared to be at hand. Meanwhile Shaftesbury turned the panic to political account.
He fiercely demanded in the House of Lords the exclusion of the Duke of York from the king's
Council, and his demand was repeated in an address of the Commons. Charles met the attack with
consummate skill. Anticipating the future Exclusion Bill, he declared himself ready to sanction
any measures which secured the Protestant religion so long as they left untouched the right
of hereditary succession and the just power of the Crown. Shaftesbury retorted by forcing through
Parliament at the end of 1678 a bill which excluded Catholics from a seat in either House.
The exclusion remained in force for a century and a half; but it had really been aimed against
the Duke of York, and Shaftesbury was defeated by a proviso which exempted James from the operation
of the bill.

[Sidenote: Lewis and the Plot.]

The plot, which had been supported for four months by the sole evidence of Oates, began to
hang fire at the opening of 1679; but a promise of reward brought forward a villain named Bedloe
with tales beside which those of Oates seemed tame. The two informers were pressed forward
by an infamous rivalry to stranger and stranger revelations. Bedloe swore to the existence
of a plot for the landing of a Catholic army and a general massacre of the Protestants. Oates
capped the revelations of Bedloe by charging the queen herself at the bar of the Lords with
knowledge of the plot to murder her husband. Monstrous as such charges were they revived the
waning frenzy of the people and of the two Houses. The peers under arrest were ordered to be
impeached. A new proclamation enjoined the arrest of every Catholic in the realm. A series
of judicial murders began with the trial and execution of Coleman which even now can only be
remembered with horror. But the alarm must soon have worn out had it only been supported by
perjury. What gave force to the false plot was the existence of a true one. Coleman's letters
had won credit for the perjuries of Oates, and a fresh discovery now won credit for the perjuries
of Bedloe.

[Sidenote: Dissolution of the Parliament.]

From the moment when the pressure of the Commons and of Danby had forced Charles into a position
of seeming antagonism to France Lewis had resolved to bring about the dissolution of the Parliament,
the fall of the minister, and the disbanding of the army which Danby still looked on as a weapon
against him. The aims of the Country party were the same as those of the French king, and even
before the Peace of Nimeguen the French ambassador, Barillon, had succeeded in opening a correspondence
on these points with its leaders, with Shaftesbury, Halifax, and Lord Russell. A closer connexion
was negotiated in 1678 through the mediation of Algernon Sidney; and money was entrusted to
Russell and other prominent members of the Country party by Barillon to be used in the bribery
which, disgraceful as it was, was now almost necessary to counteract the bribery of Danby.
The confederates soon brought a more effective weapon into play. The English ambassador at
Paris, Ralph Montagu, returned home on a quarrel with Danby, obtained a seat in the House of
Commons, and in spite of the seizure of his papers laid on the table of the House the despatch
which had been forwarded to Lewis, demanding payment for the king's services to France during
the late negotiations. The Commons were thunderstruck; for strong as had been the general suspicion
the fact of the dependence of England on a foreign power had never before been proved. Danby's
name was signed to the despatch, and he was at once impeached on a charge of high treason.
But Shaftesbury was more eager to secure the election of a new Parliament than to punish his
rival, and Charles was resolved to prevent at any price a trial which could not fail to reveal
the disgraceful secret of his foreign policy. Charles was in fact at Shaftesbury's mercy, and
the end for which Shaftesbury had been playing was at last secured. In January 1679 the Parliament
of 1661, after the longest unbroken life in our Parliamentary annals, was at last dissolved.

[Sidenote: The New Ministry.]

A new Parliament was at once summoned and its election took place in a tumult of national excitement.
The process of Parliamentary corruption now took a further step. Danby had begun the bribery
of members. With the election of 1679 began on a large and systematic scale the bribery or
"treating" of constituents. If members had come to realize the money value of the seats they
held, the voters for these members were quick to realize the money value of the seats they
bestowed. "I am told," writes the Venetian ambassador, Sarotti, "that in the more conspicuous
and populous places their election will cost some of the candidates five thousand scudi (about
a thousand pounds) each." The new members were still for the most part Churchmen and country
gentlemen, but they shared the alarm of the country, and even before their assembly in March
their temper had told on the king's policy. James was sent to Brussels. Charles began to disband
the army and promised that Danby should soon withdraw from office. In his speech from the throne
he asked for supplies to maintain the Protestant attitude of his Government in foreign affairs.
But it was impossible to avert Danby's fall. The Commons insisted on carrying his impeachment
to the bar of the Lords. It was necessary to dismiss him from his post of Treasurer and to
construct a new ministry. In the existing temper of the Houses such a ministry could only be
found in the men who had brought about Danby's fall. Shaftesbury became President of the Council.
The chiefs of the Country party, Lord Russell and Lord Cavendish, took their seats at the board
with Lords Holles and Robartes, the older representatives of the Presbyterian party which had
merged in the general Opposition. Savile, Lord Halifax, as yet known only as a keen and ingenious
speaker, entered the ministry in the train of Shaftesbury with whom his family was connected.
Lord Sunderland, a man adroit and unscrupulous but as yet ranked in the Opposition, was admitted
to the Council; while Lord Essex and Sir H. Capel, two of the most popular among the Country
leaders, went to the Treasury and Admiralty. The recall of Sir William Temple, the negotiator
of the Triple Alliance, from his embassy at the Hague to fill the post of Secretary of State
promised a foreign policy which would again place England high among the European powers.

[Sidenote: Temple and his Council.]

Temple returned with a plan of administration which, fruitless as it directly proved, is of
great importance as marking the silent change which was passing over the English Constitution.
Like many men of his time he was equally alarmed at the power both of the Crown and of the
Parliament. In moments of national excitement the power of the Houses seemed irresistible.
They had overthrown Clarendon. They had overthrown Clifford and the Cabal. They had just overthrown
Danby. But though they were strong enough in the end to punish ill government they showed no
power of securing good government or of permanently influencing the policy of the Crown. For
nineteen years in fact with a Parliament always sitting Charles had had it pretty much his
own way. He had made war against the will of the nation and he had refused to make war when
the nation demanded it. While every Englishman hated France he had made England a mere dependency
of the French king. The remedy for this state of things, as it was afterwards found, was a
very simple one. By a change which we shall have to trace the ministry has now become a Committee
of State-officers named by the majority of the House of Commons from amongst the more prominent
of its representatives in either House, whose object in accepting office is to do the will
of that majority. So long as the majority of the House of Commons itself represents the more
powerful current of public opinion it is clear that such an arrangement makes government an
accurate reflection of the national will. But obvious as such a plan may seem to us, it had
as yet occurred to no English statesman. To Temple the one remedy seemed to lie in the restoration
of the royal Council to its older powers.

[Sidenote: The Cabinet.]

This body, composed as it was of the great officers of the Court, the royal Treasurer and Secretaries,
and a few nobles specially summoned to it by the sovereign, formed up to the close of Elizabeth's
reign a sort of deliberative assembly to which the graver matters of public administration
were commonly submitted by the Crown. A practice, however, of previously submitting such measures
to a smaller body of the more important councillors must always have existed; and under James
this secret committee, which was then known as the Cabala or Cabal, began almost wholly to
supersede the Council itself. In the large and balanced Council which was formed after the
Restoration all real power rested with the "Cabala" of Clarendon, Southampton, Ormond, Monk,
and the two Secretaries; and on Clarendon's fall these were succeeded by Clifford, Arlington,
Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale. It was by a mere coincidence that the initials of the latter
names formed the word "Cabal," which has ever since retained the sinister meaning their unpopularity
gave to it. The effect of these smaller committees had undoubtedly been to remove the check
which the larger numbers and the more popular composition of the royal Council laid upon the
Crown. The unscrupulous projects which made the Cabal of Clifford and his fellows a byword
among Englishmen could never have been laid before a Council of great peers and hereditary
officers of State. To Temple therefore the organization of the Council seemed to furnish a
check on mere personal government which Parliament was unable to supply. For this purpose he
proposed that the Cabala or Cabinet, as it was now becoming the fashion to term the confidential
committee of the Council, should be abolished. The Council itself was restricted to thirty
members, and their joint income was not to fall below £300,000, a sum little less than what
was estimated as the income of the whole House of Commons. A body of great nobles and proprietors,
not too numerous for secret deliberation and wealthy enough to counterbalance either the Commons
or the Crown, would form, Temple hoped, a barrier against the violence and aggression of the
one power and a check on the mere despotism of the other.

[Sidenote: The Habeas Corpus Act.]

Whatever might be the fate of these schemes the new Council and the new ministry gave fair
hope of a wise and patriotic government. But the difficulties were still great. The nation
was frenzied with suspicion and panic. The elections to the new Parliament had taken place
amidst a whirl of excitement which left no place for candidates of the Court. The appointment
of the new ministry indeed was welcomed with a general burst of joy, and its policy and that
of the two Houses showed at once that a more liberal spirit had entered into public affairs.
In two remarkable acts of the new Parliament English freedom made an advance even on the work
of 1641. From the moment when printing began to tell on public opinion it had been gagged by
a system of licenses. The regulations framed under Henry the Eighth subjected the press to
the control of the Star Chamber, and the Martin Marprelate libels brought about a yet more
stringent control under Elizabeth. Even the Long Parliament laid a heavy hand on the press,
and the great remonstrance of Milton in his "Areopagitica" fell dead on the ears of his Puritan
associates. But the statute for the regulation of printing which was passed immediately after
the Restoration expired finally in 1679 and the temper of the present Parliament at once put
an end to any attempt at re-establishing the censorship. To the new freedom of the press the
Habeas Corpus Act added new security for the personal freedom of every Englishman. Against
arbitrary imprisonment provision had been made in the earliest ages by a famous clause in the
Great Charter. No free man could be held in prison save on charge or conviction of crime or
for debt; and every prisoner on a criminal charge could demand as a right from the court of
King's Bench the issue of a writ of "habeas corpus," which bound his gaoler to produce both
the prisoner and the warrant on which he was imprisoned that the court might judge whether
he was imprisoned according to law. In cases, however, of imprisonment on a warrant of the
royal Council it had been sometimes held by judges that the writ could not be issued, and under
Clarendon's administration instances had in this way occurred of imprisonment without legal
remedy. But his fall was quickly followed by the introduction of a bill to secure this right
of the subject, and after a long struggle the Act which is known as the Habeas Corpus Act passed
finally in the Parliament of 1679. By this great statute the old practice of the law was freed
from all difficulties and exceptions. Every prisoner committed for any crime save treason or
felony was declared entitled to his writ even in the vacations of the courts, and heavy penalties
were enforced on judges or gaolers who refused him this right. Every person committed for felony
or treason was entitled to be released on bail unless indicted at the next session of gaol-delivery
after his commitment, and to be discharged if not indicted at the sessions which followed.
It was forbidden under the heaviest penalties to evade this operation of the writ as it had
been evaded under Clarendon by sending a prisoner to any places or fortresses beyond the seas.

[Sidenote: The Bill of Securities.]

Great as was the value of the Habeas Corpus Act it passed almost unnoticed amidst the political
storm which the ministry had to face. The question of the Succession threw all others into
the shade. At the bottom of the national panic lay the dread of a Catholic king, a dread which
the after history of James fully justified. Unluckily on the question of the succession the
new ministers were themselves divided. Shaftesbury was earnest for the exclusion of James and
he was followed in his plan of exclusion by Lord Russell. Against a change in the order of
hereditary succession however Charles was firm; and he was supported in his resistance by a
majority of the Council with Temple and Lord Essex, Lord Halifax, and Lord Sunderland at its
head. It was with the assent of this party that Charles brought forward a plan for preserving
the rights of the Duke of York while restraining his powers as sovereign. By this project the
presentation to Church livings was to be taken out of his hands on his accession. The last
Parliament of the preceding reign was to continue to sit; and the appointment of all Councillors,
Judges, Lord-Lieutenants, and officers in the fleet, was vested in the two Houses so long as
a Catholic sovereign was on the throne. The extent of these provisions showed the pressure
which Charles felt, but Shaftesbury was undoubtedly right in setting the plan aside as at once
insufficient and impracticable. The one real security for English freedom lay in a thorough
understanding between King and Parliament; and the scheme of Charles set them against one another
as rival powers in the realm. It was impossible in fact that such a harmony could exist between
a Protestant Parliament and a Catholic sovereign.

[Sidenote: The Exclusion Bill.]

Shaftesbury therefore continued to advocate the Exclusion in the royal Council; and a bill
for depriving James of his right to the Crown and for devolving it on the next Protestant in
the line of succession was introduced into the Commons by his adherents. In spite of a powerful
opposition from patriots like Lord Cavendish and Sir William Coventry who still shrank from
a change in the succession the bill passed the House by a large majority. It was known that
Charles would use his influence with the Peers for its rejection, and the Earl therefore fell
back on the tactics of Pym. A bold Remonstrance was prepared in the Commons. The City of London,
in which Shaftesbury's popularity had now risen to its greatest height, was ready with an address
to the two Houses in favour of the bill. All Charles could do was to gain time by a sudden
prorogation of the Parliament and by its dissolution at the end of May. But delay would have
been useless had the Country party remained at one. The temper of the nation and of the House
of Commons was so hotly pronounced in favour of the Exclusion of the Duke that but for the
disunion among the ministers it must in the end have been secured. England would then have
been spared the necessity for the Revolution of 1688. Though the disunion grew greater and
hotter indeed the wiser leaders of the Country party were already leaning to the very change
which the Revolution brought about. If James were passed over his daughter Mary, the wife of
the Prince of Orange, stood next in the order of succession; and the plan devised by Temple,
Lord Essex, and Lord Halifax after the failure of their Bill of Securities was to bring the
Prince over to England during the prorogation, to introduce him into the Council, and to pave
his way to the throne.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury and Monmouth.]

Unhappily Shaftesbury was contemplating a very different course. Ever since William had set
aside his proposals in 1674, and above all since his marriage with the Duke's daughter, Shaftesbury
had looked on the Prince of Orange as a mere adherent of the royal house and a supporter of
the royal plans. He saw, too, that firm as was William's Protestantism he was as jealous as
Charles himself of any weakening of the royal power or invasion of the royal prerogative. Shaftesbury's
keen wit was already looking forward to the changes which a few years were to bring about;
and his motive for setting aside William's claims is probably to be found in the maxim ascribed
to him, that "a bad title makes a good king." Whatever were his motives however he had resolved
not only to set aside the claims of the Duke and the Duke's children, Mary and Anne, as well
as William's own claim as grandson of Charles I., but to place the Duke of Monmouth on the
throne. Monmouth, reputed to be the eldest of the king's bastards, a weak and worthless profligate
in temper, was popular through his personal beauty and his reputation for bravery. The tale
was set about of a secret marriage between the king and his mother which would have made him
lawful heir to the throne, and Shaftesbury brought him into public notice by inducing the king
to put him at the head of the troops sent to repress a rising of the extreme Covenanters which
broke out at this moment in the western counties of Scotland. Monmouth showed courage in routing
the insurgents at Bothwell Brig on the Clyde as well as judgement in the mercy he extended
to them after their defeat; and on his return Shaftesbury pressed the king to give him the
command of the Guards, which would have put the only military force possessed by the Crown
in Monmouth's hands.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury's Second Dismissal.]

Sunderland, Halifax, and Essex, on the other hand--for Temple took less and less part in public
affairs--were not only steadily opposed to Shaftesbury's project, but saw themselves marked
out for ruin in the event of its success. They had advised the dissolution of the last Parliament;
and the Earl's anger had vented itself in threats that the advisers of the dissolution should
pay for it with their heads. The danger came home to them when a sudden illness of the king
and the absence of James made Monmouth's accession a possible contingency. The three ministers
at once induced Charles to recall the Duke of York; and though he withdrew to Scotland on the
king's recovery Charles deprived Monmouth of his charge as Captain-General of the Forces and
ordered him like James to leave the realm. Left alone in his cause by the opposition of his
colleagues, Shaftesbury threw himself more and more on the support of the Plot. The prosecution
of its victims was pushed recklessly on. Three Catholics were hanged in London. Eight priests
were put to death in the country. Pursuivants and informers spread terror through every Catholic
household. He counted on the reassembling of the Parliament to bring all this terror to bear
upon the king. But Charles had already marked the breach which the Earl's policy had made in
the ranks of the Country party. He saw that Shaftesbury was unsupported by any of his colleagues
save Russell. To Temple, Essex, or Halifax, it seemed possible to bring about the succession
of Mary without any violent revolution; but to set aside the rights not only of James but of
his Protestant children and even of the Prince of Orange was to ensure a civil war. It was
with their full support therefore that Charles in October 1679 deprived Shaftesbury of his
post of Lord President of the Council.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury's struggle.]

The dismissal was the signal for a struggle to whose danger Charles was far from blinding himself.
What had saved him till now was his cynical courage. In the midst of the terror and panic of
the Plot men "wondered to see him quite cheerful amidst such an intricacy of troubles," says
the courtly Reresby, "but it was not in his nature to think or perplex himself much about anything."
Even in the heat of the tumult which followed on Shaftesbury's dismissal Charles was seen fishing
and sauntering as usual in Windsor Park. But closer observers than Reresby saw beneath this
veil of indolent unconcern a consciousness of new danger. "From this time," says Burnet, "his
temper was observed to change very visibly." He became in fact "sullen and thoughtful; he saw
that he had to do with a strange sort of people, that could neither be managed nor frightened."
But he faced the danger with his old unscrupulous coolness. He reopened secret negotiations
with France. Lewis was as alarmed as Charles himself at the warlike temper of the nation, and
as anxious to prevent the calling of a Parliament; but the terms on which he offered a subsidy
were too humiliating even for the king's acceptance. The failure forced him to summon a new
Parliament; and the panic which Shaftesbury was busily feeding with new tales of massacre and
invasion returned members even more violent than the members of the House he had just dismissed.
The project of Monmouth's succession was pressed with more daring than ever. Pamphlets appeared
in open support of his claim. The young Duke himself suddenly quitted Holland and reappeared
at Court; and though Charles forced him after a time to leave London he refused to leave England
altogether. Shaftesbury counted on the new Parliament to back the Duke's claim, and a host
of petitions called on the king to suffer it to meet at the opening of 1680. Even the Council
shrank from the king's proposal to prorogue its assembly to the coming November. But Charles
prorogued it in the teeth of his counsellors. Alone as he stood he was firm in his resolve
to gain time, for time, as he saw, was working in his favour. The tide of public sympathy was
beginning to turn. The perjury of Oates was proving too much at last for the credulity of juries;
and the acquittal of four of his victims showed that the panic was beginning to ebb. A far
stronger proof of this was seen in the immense efforts which Shaftesbury made to maintain a
belief in the plot. Fresh informers were brought forward to swear to a conspiracy for the assassination
of the Earl himself, and to the share of the Duke of York in the designs of his fellow-religionists.
A paper found in a meal-tub was produced as evidence of the new danger. Gigantic torchlight
processions paraded the streets of London, and the effigy of the Pope was burnt amidst the
wild outcry of a vast multitude.

[Sidenote: The Reaction begins.]

Acts of yet greater daring showed the lengths to which Shaftesbury was ready to go. He had
grown up amidst the tumults of civil war, and, greyheaded as he was, the fire and vehemence
of his early days seemed to wake again in the recklessness with which he drove on the nation
to a struggle in arms. Early in 1680 he formed a committee for promoting agitation throughout
the country; and the petitions which it drew up for the assembly of the Parliament were sent
to every town and grand jury and sent back again with thousands of signatures. Monmouth, in
spite of the king's orders, returned at Shaftesbury's call to London; and a daring pamphlet
pointed him out as the nation's leader in the coming struggle "against Popery and tyranny."
So great was the alarm of the Council that the garrison in every fortress was held in readiness
for instant war. But the danger was really less than it seemed. The tide of opinion had fairly
turned. Acquittal followed acquittal. A reaction of horror and remorse at the cruelty which
had hurried victim after victim to the gallows succeeded to the pitiless frenzy which Shaftesbury
had fanned into a flame. Anxious as the nation was for a Protestant sovereign its sense of
justice revolted against the wrong threatened to James's Protestant children; and every gentleman
in the realm felt insulted at the project of setting Mary aside to put the crown of England
on the head of a royal bastard.

[Sidenote: Petitioners and Abhorrers.]

The memory too of the Civil War was still fresh and keen, and the rumour of an outbreak of
revolt rallied men more and more round the king. The host of petitions which Shaftesbury procured
from the counties was answered by a counter-host of addresses from thousands who declared their
"abhorrence" of the plans against the Crown; and the country saw itself divided into two great
factions of "petitioners" and "abhorrers," the germs of the two great parties which have played
so prominent a part in our political history from the time of the Exclusion Bill. It was now
indeed that these parties began to receive the names of Whig and Tory by which they were destined
to be known. Each was originally a term of reproach. "Whig" was the name given to the extreme
Covenanters of the west of Scotland, and in applying it to the members of the Country party
the "abhorrer" meant to stigmatize them as rebels and fanatics. "Tory" was at this time the
name for a native Irish outlaw or "bogtrotter," and in fastening it on the loyalist adherents
of James's cause the "petitioner" meant to brand the Duke and his party as the friends of Catholic
rebels.

Charles at once took advantage of this turn of affairs. He recalled the Duke of York to the
Court. He received the resignation of Lord Russell as well as those of Lord Cavendish and the
Earl of Essex who had at last gone over to Shaftesbury's projects "with all his heart." Temple
had all but withdrawn from the Council; and public affairs were now left in the hands of Lord
Sunderland and Lord Halifax, of Godolphin, a laborious financier, and of Laurence Hyde, a younger
son of Lord Clarendon. Shaftesbury met the king's defiance with as bold a defiance of his own.
Followed by a crowd of his adherents he attended before the Grand Jury of Middlesex to indict
the Duke of York as a Catholic recusant and the king's mistress, the Duchess of Portsmouth,
as a national nuisance, while Monmouth made a progress through the country and gained favour
everywhere by his winning demeanour. Above all Shaftesbury relied on the temper of the Commons,
elected as they had been in the very heat of the panic and irritated by the long delay in calling
the Houses together.

[Sidenote: France and Europe.]

At this moment, however, a new and formidable opponent to Shaftesbury's plans presented himself
in the Prince of Orange. The position of William had for some time been one of singular difficulty.
He had been forced, and chiefly through the treacherous diplomacy of Charles the Second, to
consent to the Treaty of Nimeguen which left France matchless in arms and dominant over Europe
as she had never been before. Holland indeed was saved from the revenge of Lewis, but fresh
spoils had been wrested from Spain, and Franche-Comté which had been restored at the close
of the former war was retained at the end of this. Above all, France overawed Europe by the
daring and success with which she had faced single-handed the wide coalition against her. From
the moment when the war came to an end her king's arrogance became unbounded. Lorraine was
turned into a subject-state. Genoa was bombarded and its Doge forced to seek pardon in the
ante-chambers of Versailles. The Pope was humiliated by the march of an army upon Rome to avenge
a slight offered to the French ambassador. The Empire was outraged by a shameless seizure of
Imperial fiefs in Elsass and elsewhere which provoked remonstrances even from Charles. The
whole Protestant world was defied by the increasing persecution of the Huguenots, a persecution
which was to culminate in the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

[Sidenote: William and England.]

In the mind of Lewis peace meant a series of outrages on the powers around him; but every outrage
helped the cool and silent adversary who was looking on from the Hague in his task of building
up that Great Alliance of all Europe from which alone he looked for any effectual check to
the ambition of France. The experience of the last war had taught William that of such an alliance
England must form a part, and the efforts of the Prince ever since the peace had been directed
to secure her co-operation. A reconciliation of the king with his Parliament was an indispensable
step towards freeing Charles from his dependence on France, and it was such a reconciliation
that William at first strove to bring about; but he was for a long time foiled by the steadiness
with which Charles clung to the power whose aid was needful to carry out the schemes which
he was contemplating. The change of policy, however, which followed on the fall of the Cabal
and the entry of Danby into power raised new hopes in William's mind, and his marriage with
Mary dealt Lewis what proved to be a fatal blow. James was without a son, and the marriage
with Mary would at any rate ensure William the aid of England in his great enterprise on his
father-in-law's death. But it was impossible to wait for that event, and though the Prince
used his new position to bring Charles round to a decided policy his efforts remained fruitless.
The storm of the Popish Plot complicated his position. In the earlier stages of the Exclusion
Bill, when the Parliament seemed resolved simply to pass over James and to seat Mary at once
on the throne after her uncle's death, William stood apart from the struggle, doubtful of its
issue though prepared to accept the good luck if it came to him. But the fatal error of Shaftesbury
in advancing the claims of Monmouth forced him into action. To preserve his wife's right of
succession with all the great issues which were to come of it, as well as to secure his own,
no other course was left than to adopt the cause of the Duke of York. Charles too seemed at
last willing to purchase the support of the Prince in England by a frank adhesion to his policy
abroad. He protested against the encroachments which Lewis was making in Germany. He promised
aid to Holland in case of attack. He listened with favour to William's proposal of a general
alliance of the European powers, and opened negotiations for that purpose with Brandenburg
and Spain. William indeed believed that the one step now needed to bring England to his side
in the coming struggle with Lewis was a reconciliation between Charles and the Parliament grounded
on the plan for providing Protestant securities which Charles was ready again to bring forward.

[Sidenote: William and the Exclusion.]

But he still remained in an attitude of reserve when the Parliament at last met in October.
The temper of the Commons was as bitter as Shaftesbury had hoped. It was in vain that Charles
informed them of his negotiations for an European alliance and called on them to support him
by reason and moderation. The House was too full of the sense of danger at home to heed dangers
abroad. Its first act was to vote that its care should be "to suppress Popery and prevent a
Popish successor." Rumours of a Catholic plot in Ireland were hardly needed to set aside all
schemes of Protestant securities, and to push the Exclusion Bill through the Commons without
a division. So strong had Monmouth's party become that a proposal to affirm the rights of Mary
and William by name in the Bill was evaded and put aside. From this moment the course of the
Prince became clear. So resolute was the temper of the Lower House that even Temple and Essex
now gave their adhesion to the Exclusion Bill as a necessity, and Sunderland himself wavered
towards accepting it. But Halifax, whose ability and eloquence had now brought him fairly to
the front, opposed it resolutely and successfully in the Lords; and Halifax was but the mouthpiece
of William. "My Lord Halifax is entirely in the interest of the Prince of Orange," the French
ambassador, Barillon, wrote to his master, "and what he seems to be doing for the Duke of York
is really in order to make an opening for a compromise by which the Prince of Orange may benefit."
The Exclusion Bill once rejected, Halifax followed up the blow by bringing forward a plan of
Protestant securities which would have taken from James on his accession the right of veto
on any bill passed by the two Houses, the right of negotiating with foreign states, or of appointing
either civil or military officers save with the consent of Parliament. This plan, like his
opposition to the Exclusion, was no doubt prompted by the Prince of Orange; and the States
of Holland supported it by pressing Charles to come to an accommodation with his subjects which
would enable them to check the perpetual aggressions which France was making on her neighbours.

[Sidenote: Trial of Lord Stafford.]

But if the Lords would have no Exclusion Bill the Commons with as good reason would have no
Securities Bill. They felt--as one of the members for London fairly put it--that such securities
would break down at the very moment they were needed. A Catholic king, should he ever come
to the throne, would have other forces besides those in England to back him. "The Duke rules
over Scotland; the Irish and the English Papists will follow him; he will be obeyed by the
officials of high and low rank whom the king has appointed; he will be just such a king as
he thinks good." Shaftesbury, however, was far from resting in a merely negative position.
He made a despairing effort to do the work of exclusion by a Bill of Divorce, which would have
enabled Charles to put away his queen on the ground of barrenness and by a fresh marriage to
give a Protestant heir to the throne. The Earl's course shows that he felt the weakness of
Monmouth's cause; and perhaps that he was already sensible of a change in public feeling. This,
however, Shaftesbury resolved to check and turn by a great public impeachment which would revive
and establish the general belief in the Plot. Lord Stafford, who from his age and rank was
looked on as the leader of the Catholic party, had lain a prisoner in the Tower since the first
outburst of popular frenzy. He was now solemnly impeached; and his trial in December 1680 mustered
the whole staff of informers to prove the truth of a Catholic conspiracy against the king and
the realm. The evidence was worthless; but the trial revived, as Shaftesbury had hoped, much
of the old panic, and the condemnation of the prisoner by a majority of his peers was followed
by his death on the scaffold. The blow produced its effect on all but Charles. Sunderland again
pressed the king to give way. But deserted as he was by his ministers and even by his mistress,
for the Duchess of Portsmouth had been cowed into supporting the Exclusion by the threats of
Shaftesbury, Charles was determined to resist. On the coupling of a grant of supplies with
demands for a voice in the appointment of officers of the royal garrisons he prorogued the
Parliament.

[Sidenote: Charles turns again to France.]

William's policy had failed to bring the Commons round to the king's plans and Charles sullenly
turned again to France. All dreams of heading Europe in her strife against Lewis were set aside.
Charles became deaf to the projects of the Prince of Orange, and listened to the remonstrances
which James addressed to him through his favourite Churchill in favour of an alliance with
the Catholic king. With characteristic subtlety, however, he dissolved the existing Parliament
and called a new one to meet in March 1681. The act was a mere blind. The king's aim was to
frighten the country into reaction by the dread of civil strife; and his summons of the Parliament
to Oxford was an appeal to the country against the disloyalty of the capital, and an adroit
means of reviving the memories of the Civil War. With the same end he ordered his guards to
accompany him on the pretext of anticipated disorder; and Shaftesbury, himself terrified at
the projects of the Court, aided the king's designs by appearing with his followers in arms
on the plea of self-protection. The violence of the Earl's party only strengthened the resolution
of the king. Monmouth renewed his progresses through the country, and was met by deputations
and addresses in every town he visited. London was so restless that riots broke out in its
streets. Revolt seemed at hand, and Charles hastened to conclude his secret negotiations with
France. Lewis was as ready for an agreement as Charles. The one king verbally pledged himself
to a policy of peace, in other words to withdrawal from any share in the Grand Alliance which
William was building up. The other promised a small subsidy which with the natural growth of
the Royal revenue sufficed to render Charles, if he remained at peace, independent of Parliamentary
aids.

[Sidenote: The Parliament at Oxford.]

It was with this arrangement already concluded that Charles met his Parliament at Oxford. The
members of the House of Commons were the same as those who had been returned to the Parliaments
he had just dissolved, and their temper was naturally embittered by the two dissolutions. But
their violence simply played into the king's hands. William's party still had hopes of bringing
about a compromise; but the rejection of a new Limitation Bill brought forward by Halifax,
which while conceding to James the title of king would have vested the actual functions of
government in the Prince and Princess of Orange during his reign, alienated the more moderate
and sensible of the Country party. They were alienated still more by a bold appeal of Shaftesbury
to Charles himself to recognize Monmouth as his successor. The attempt of the Lower House to
revive the panic by impeaching an informer named Fitzharris before the House of Lords, in defiance
of the constitutional rule which entitled him as a commoner to a trial by his peers in the
course of common law, did still more to throw public opinion on the side of the Crown. Shaftesbury's
course, in fact, went wholly on a belief that the penury of the Treasury left Charles at his
mercy, and that a refusal of supplies must wring from the king his assent to the Exclusion.
But the gold of France had freed the king from his thraldom. He had used the Parliament simply
to exhibit himself as a sovereign whose patience and conciliatory temper were rewarded with
insult and violence; and now that his end was accomplished he no sooner saw the Exclusion Bill
reintroduced into the Commons than he suddenly dissolved the Houses after but a month's sitting
and appealed in a royal declaration to the justice of the nation at large.

[Sidenote: Dryden.]

The appeal was met by an almost universal burst of loyalty. The Church rallied to the king;
his declaration was read from every pulpit; and the Universities solemnly decided that "no
religion, no law, no fault, no forfeiture" could avail to bar the sacred right of hereditary
succession. The arrest of Shaftesbury on a charge of suborning false witnesses to the Plot
marked the new strength of the Crown. The answer of the nation at large was uttered in the
first great poem of John Dryden. Born in 1631 of a good Northamptonshire family, Dryden had
grown up amidst the tumult of the civil wars in a Puritan household. His grandfather, Sir Erasmus
Dryden, had gone to prison at seventy rather than contribute to a forced loan. His father had
been a committee-man and sequestrator under the Commonwealth. He entered life under the protection
of a cousin, Sir Gilbert Pickering, who sate as one of the judges at the king's trial. Much
of this early training lived in Dryden to the last. He never freed himself from the Puritan
sense of religion, from the Puritan love for theological discussion and ecclesiastical controversy.
Two of his greatest poems, the "Religio Laici," and the "Hind and Panther," are simply theological
treatises in verse. Nor did the Commonwealth's man ever die in him. "All good subjects," he
could say boldly in an hour of royal triumph, "abhor arbitrary power whether in one or in many";
and no writer has embodied in more pregnant words the highest claim of a people's right, that

                               "right supreme
     To make their kings, for kings are made for them."

Dryden grew up too amidst the last echoes of the Elizabethan verse. Jonson and Massinger, Webster
and Shirley, were still living men in his childhood. The lyrics of Herrick, the sweet fancies
of George Herbert, were fresh in men's ears as he grew to manhood. Even when he entered into
the new world of the Restoration some veterans of this nobler school, like Denham and Waller,
were still lingering on the stage. The fulness and imaginative freedom of Elizabethan prose
lived on till 1677 in Jeremy Taylor, while Clarendon preserved to yet later years the grandeur
and stateliness of its march. Above all Milton still sate musing on the "Paradise Lost" in
the tapestried chamber of his house in Bunhill Fields.

[Sidenote: Dryden and the Critical Poets.]

Throughout his life something of the spirit of the age which he was the last to touch lived
on in Dryden. He loved and studied Chaucer and Spenser even while he was copying Molière and
Corneille. His noblest panegyric was pronounced over Shakspere. At the time when Rymer, the
accepted critic of the Restoration, declared "our poetry of the last age as rude as our architecture,"
and sneered at "that Paradise Lost of Milton's which some are pleased to call a poem," Dryden
saw in it "one of the greatest, most noble and sublime poems which either this age or nation
hath produced." But whether in mind or in life Dryden was as unlike the Elizabethans as he
was in his earlier years unlike the men of the poetic school which followed him. Of that school,
the critical school as it has been called of English poetry, he was indeed the founder. He
is the first of our great poets in whom "fancy is but the feather of the pen." Whether he would
or no Dryden's temper was always intellectual. He was a poet, for if dead to the subtler and
more delicate forms of imaginative delight he loved grandeur, and his amazing natural force
enabled him to realize in great part the grandeur which he loved. But beneath all his poetry
lay a solid bottom of reason. His wildest outbursts of passion are broken by long passages
of cool argument. His heroes talk to his heroines in a serried dialectic. Every problem of
morals, of religion, of politics, forces itself into his verse, and is treated there in the
same spirit of critical inquiry.

[Sidenote: His Tragedies.]

In other words Dryden was the poet of his day. But he was the poet of a time of transition,
and his temper is transitional. It was only by slow and uncertain steps that he advanced to
the full rationalism of the Critical school. His first little poem, some verses written in
1659 on the death of Lord Hastings, is a mass of grotesque extravagances in the worst style
of Donne. [Sidenote: The English Disciples of the German School.]

[Sidenote: Love of Novelty.]

This also is largely true of the English critics. Many of them are well furnished for Greek criticism.
The number of Greek Englishmen is still very large. But these seem also to fortify, at least,
their own conclusions by the opinions of the original German investigators. It is hard to believe
that, in the contests for German professorial position, as well as in the justification of the
incumbent when the position is gained, the desire to attract attention by some critical novelty
of method or result has not been in some cases, at least, as influential as a simple love of truth.

[Sidenote:
Some Questions as to Style.]

There is always the question also, which I profess seems to be one
not easy of answer, whether the literary judgments as to style when
men are dealing with another language than their own, and especially
with Greek and Hebrew, can be as worthy of acceptance as their authors
and many others hold them to be; whether, in short, their opinions
may not, like those of experts in handwriting, come to be so colored
by their personality, or their interests, as to be of little evidential
value.

On this point it seems to me that not enough allowance has been made by these critics for
the difference in style when men write familiarly or didactically, or when they are engaged in narration
or exhortation.

[Sidenote: Foundation of Belief Unsettled.]

Whatever may be the truth as to these matters, the present state of faith is due to the unsettlement
of the foundation of belief by scientific and critical scholarship.

[Sidenote: A New Foundation to Emerge.]

This unsettlement, admitted on every hand with difference of opinion as to extent, is either
to increase until faith in Christianity, except as an ethical and
humanitarian system, is dead, or abide until faith revives by a perception
that the Church has maintained an erroneous basis for faith and that
a new and stronger one is emerging from the sea of discussion. This
last I believe to be the truth in the matter. I hold, therefore, that
faith is not dying, but suffering in some minds from a kind of lunar
eclipse, where a shadow diminishes, temporarily, the radiance, but
does not extinguish the planet itself. The vice of the English libertine was hard and unnatural
just because his real nature took little share in it. In sheer revolt against the past he was
playing a part which was not his own and which he played badly, which he forced and exaggerated,
just because it was not his own. Dryden scoffs at priests and creeds, but his greater poetry
is coloured throughout with religion. He plays the rake, but the two pictures which he has
painted with all his heart are the pictures of the honest country squire and the poor country
parson. He passes his rivals in the grossness of his comedies, he flings himself recklessly
into the evil about him because it is the fashion and because it pays. But he cannot sport
lightly and gaily with what is foul. He is driven if he is coarse at all to be brutally coarse.
His freedom of tone, to borrow Scott's fine remark, is like the forced impudence of a timid man.

[Sidenote: The New Criticism.]

Slowly but ceaselessly, however, the critical taste of his time told on Dryden. The poetry
of good sense, as it proudly called itself, triumphed in Boileau, and the rules of taste and
form which Boileau laid down were accepted as the law of letters on the one side of the Channel
as well as on the other. Andrew Marvell, in whom the older imaginative beauty still found a
worshipper, stood alone in his laughter at the degradation of poetry into prose. Fancy was
set aside for reason, "that substantial useful part which gains the head, while Fancy wins
the heart." It was the head and not the heart that poetry now cared to gain. But with all its
prose the new criticism did a healthy work in insisting on clearness, simplicity, and good
sense. In his "Rehearsal" Buckingham quizzed fairly enough the fume and bombast of Dryden's
tragedies. "I have come," said Lettice, "with the young lady's work--I had not time to come last
night, but I hope I have not put her to any inconvenience--I started before light this morning."

"Well,
my dear, I hope not," said the servant, "but it was a pity you could not get it done last night.
Mrs. Danvers likes to have people exact to the moment. However, I dare say it will be all right."

As
Reynolds, the servant-man, entered the drawing room, Lettice heard a voice, "Is it come at last!"
And the young lady, who thus inquired, was Catherine Melvin, who was then making an early breakfast
before a noble blazing fire.
"Has the woman brought her bill," asked Mrs. Danvers.

"I will go
and ask," said the servant. "Stay, ask her to come up.

[Sidenote: Dryden and the Plot.]

It was in this mood of failure and disappointment that the Popish Plot found him. Of its reality
he made no question; "a plot," he says emphatically, "there was." But his cool good sense saw
how the truth had been "dashed and brewed with lies." What stirred him more was, as he believed,
the return of anarchy. Puritan as his training had been he had grown up like the bulk of the
men about him with a horror of the social and religious disorders which the civil war had brought
in its train. He clung to authority as a security against revolution. It was this that drove
him from the Puritanism of his youth to the Anglican dogmatism of the "Religio Laici," and
from thence to the tempered Catholicism of the "Hind and Panther." It was this which made him
sing by turns the praises of Cromwell and the praises of the king whom Cromwell had hunted
from one refuge to another. No man denounced the opponents of the Crown with more ruthless
invective. No man humbled himself before the throne with more fulsome adulation. Some of this
no doubt was mere flattery, but not all of it. Dryden like his age was conscious that new currents
of feeling and opinion were sweeping him from the old moorings of mankind. But he shrank in
terror from the wide ocean over whose waters he drifted. In religion he was a rationalist,
a sceptic, whether he would or no; but he recoiled from the maze of "anxious thoughts" which
spread before him, of thoughts "that in endless circles roll without a centre where to fix
the soul," and clung to the Church that would give him, if not peace, at least quiet. In politics
he was as much a rationalist as in religion, but he turned horrorstruck from the sight of a
"state drawn to the dregs of a democracy," and in the crisis of the Popish Plot he struck blindly
for the Crown.

[Sidenote: "Absalom and Achitophel."]

Dryden like the Royalists generally believed that the arrest of Shaftesbury had alone saved
England from civil war, and from that worst of civil wars where a son fights against his father's
throne. In his "Absalom and Achitophel" the poet told the story of the threatened strife under
the thin veil of the revolt against David. Charles was the Hebrew king, Monmouth was Absalom,
Shaftesbury was the wily Achitophel who drew him into revolt. The "Absalom" was a satire, and
it was the first great English satire, for the satires of Marston and Hall were already forgotten.
It is in ages indeed like the Restoration that satire naturally comes to the front. In the
reaction after a time of high ideals and lofty efforts the sense of contrast between the aims
and the powers of man, between his hopes and their fulfilment, takes form whether in the kindly
pitifulness of humour or in the bitter revulsion of satire. And mingled with this in Dryden
was an honest indignation at the hypocrisy around him. The men he attacks are not real men
but actors. Buckingham and Shaftesbury, the infidel leader of the Independents and the deistical
leader of the Presbyterians, were alike playing a part. The servant came to the door. He was a
grave old man about fifty. His countenance was full of kind meaning, and his manners so gentle,
that before hearing her errand, observing how cold she looked, bade
her come in and warm herself at the hall stove.
But he has no love of giving pain for the mere pain's sake, and he has a hatred of unfairness.
Even in his contempt for the man he is just to Buckingham, and his anger does not blind him
to the great qualities of Shaftesbury.

[Sidenote: Progress of the Reaction.]

The even and effortless force of the poem, the disappearance of inequalities and faults of
taste, showed that Dryden was at last master of his powers. But it was not this nervous strength
alone which suddenly brought him to the forefront of English letters. It was the general sense
that his "Absalom" was the opening of a new literary developement. Its verse, free from the
old poetic merits as from the old poetic faults, clear, nervous, condensed, argumentative,
proclaimed the final triumph of the "poetry of good sense." Its series of portraits showed
the new interest in human character which had been stirred by the Civil War, and which was
deepening with the growing indifference to larger thoughts of nature and the growing concentration
of man's thoughts on man. They led the way to that delight in the analysis of character in
its lowest as in its highest forms which produced the essayists and the novel. Above all the
"Absalom" was the first work in which literature became a great political power. In it Dryden
showed himself the precursor of Swift and of Bolingbroke, of Burke and of Cobbett. The poem
was bought eagerly, and it undoubtedly helped to bring about that triumph of the king with
the prophecy of which it closed. But prisoner as Shaftesbury was, the struggle with him was
not yet over. London was still true to him; only a few days after the appearance of the "Absalom
and Achitophel" the Middlesex Grand Jury ignored the bill of his indictment, and his discharge
from the Tower was welcomed in every street with bonfires and ringing of bells. But a fresh
impulse was given to the loyal enthusiasm of the country at large by the publication of a plan
said to have been found among his papers, the plan of a secret association for the furtherance
of the Exclusion whose members bound themselves to obey the orders of Parliament even after
its prorogation or dissolution by the Crown. So general was the reaction that Halifax, who
had now become the most conspicuous member of the royal Council, though scared by the Whig
threats of impeachment, advised the calling of a new Parliament in the belief that it would
be a loyal one. William of Orange too visited England to take advantage of the turn of affairs
to pin Charles to the policy of the Alliance.

[Sidenote: Shaftesbury's Death.]

The king met both counsels with evasion. He kept his own secret. Hyde was the only one of his
ministers whom he had trusted with the knowledge of his French negotiations, and they remained
as unknown to William as to Halifax. But their effect was seen in the new vigour which Lewis
gave to his policy at home and abroad. He was resolved to bring about national unity by crushing
the French Protestants, to gain a strong frontier to the East, and to be ready to seize the
Spanish heritage on the death of Charles the Fourth. The agreement was no sooner made with
Charles than persecution fell heavy on the Huguenots; and the seizure of Strassburg and Casale,
the keys of Germany and Italy, with that of Luxemburg, the key of the United Provinces, brought
Europe to the verge of war. Charles, indeed, was anxious to avoid war and he was as anxious
to avoid Parliaments whose assembly war would certainly force upon him as Lewis himself. The
tide of loyal reaction was mounting in fact higher every day. The king secured the adhesion
of the Church by a renewed persecution of the Nonconformists, which drove Penn from England
and thus brought about the settlement of Pennsylvania as a refuge for his fellow-Quakers. Poor
Lettice went to the old band-box and took out a shabby old bonnet--she looked at it, and sighed,
when she thought of the appearance she must make; for she was going to Mrs. Danvers, and her
work was some very nice linen for a young lady about to be married.

Just at this moment she thought of the contrast, between all the fine
things which that young lady was to have, and her own destitution.
But her disposition was such as not to cause her to think hard of
others who had plenty while she was poor. It was in vain that
he offered to waive his plans of exclusion and to fall in with the king's older proposals of
a limited monarchy in the case of James's accession. The loss of London left him without a
shelter, and drove him to wild conspiracies with a handful of adventurers who were as desperate
as himself. He hid himself in the City where he boasted that ten thousand "brisk boys" were
ready to appear at his call. From his hiding-place he urged his friends to rise in arms. But
their delays drove him to flight; and in January 1683, two months after his arrival in Holland,
the soul of the great leader, great from his immense energy and the wonderful versatility of
his genius, but whose genius and energy had ended in wrecking for the time the fortunes of
English freedom and in associating the noblest of causes with the vilest of crimes, found its
first quiet in death.

[Sidenote: The Rye-House Plot.]

The flight of Shaftesbury proclaimed the triumph of the king. His marvellous sagacity had told
him when the struggle was over and further resistance useless. But the country leaders who
had delayed to answer the Earl's call still believed opposition possible, and looked for support
to the discontent of the Nonconformists at the revival of the penal laws. Monmouth, with Lord
Essex, Lord Howard of Escrick, Lord Russell, Hampden, and Algernon Sidney, held meetings with
the view of founding an association whose agitation should force on the king the assembly of
a Parliament. "'Oh, I have only five minutes to sit up, and I can wrap this piece of carpet round
mine,' said Lettice.
"And she laid down her work and went to the bed, and wrapped her
sister's icy feet in the flannel, and then sat down and finished her
task. Both projects
were betrayed, and though they were wholly distinct from one another the cruel ingenuity of
the Crown lawyers blended them into one. Lord Essex saved himself from a traitor's death by
suicide in the Tower. Lord Russell, convicted on a charge of sharing in the Rye-House plot,
was beheaded on the 21st of July 1683, in front of his father the Earl of Bedford's house in
Lincoln's Inn Fields. The same fate awaited Algernon Sidney. Monmouth fled in terror over sea,
and his flight was followed by a series of prosecutions for sedition directed against his followers.

END OF VOL.

