Yorksher Puddin'

            A collection of the most popular dialect stories
           From the pen of John Hartley. Born 1839 Died 1915.

Author of "Yorkshire ditties," "Clock Almanack," "Seets i' london," etc.

   "This life, sae far's I understand,
       is an enchanted fairy land,
    where pleasure is the magic wand, that weilded right,
       maks hours like minutes, hand in hand dance by fir' light."
                                                    Burns.

The Copyright of this Book is entirely the property of W. Nicholson and Sons, and no one will
be allowed to print any portion of it without their permission.

Preface

The numerous applications for the productions of Mr. Hartley's pen, the majority of which have
been out of print for many years, warrants us in believing that this collection of Yorkshire
Stories, will be welcomed to a large circle of his admirers.

Dedication

To my Dear Sister Hannah, to whose love and motherly care I owe more than I can ever repay,
I dedicate this little book as a token of sincere affection. John Hartley Christmas 1876.

Contents

Frozen to Death Or the Cottage on the Hill. Pill Jim's Progress Wi' Johns Bunion. Moravian
Knight's Entertainment. Sperrit Rappin. Ther's a Mule I' th' Garden. A Neet at "Widup's Rest."
Tinklin' Tom. Th' New Schooil Booard. Tha Caps me Nah! Nay Fer Sewer! Th' Battle o' Tawkin.
"Owd Tommy." (A Yorkshire Sketch.) It Mud ha' been War. Ha a Dead Donkey Towt a Lesson. One,
Two, Three. Sammy Bewitched. Hard to Pleeas. Ratcatchin'. Owd Moorcock. Peace Makkin. Awr Emma--A
False Alarm. Niver Judge by Appearances. Mi First Testimonial. Five Paand Nooat. Silly Billy.
Put up wi' it. A Queer Dream. The Mystery of Burt's Babby Mak th' best on't. Mrs Spaiktruth's
Pairty. Why Tommy isn't a Deacon. One Amang th' Rest. What's yor Hurry? Ha Owd Stooansnatch's
Dowter gate Wed. Th' New Railrooad. Mose Hart's Twelvth Mess. Th' Hoil-i'th'-Hill Statty. Owd
Dawdles. Property Huntin'. Abraham's Sparrib. A Run ovver th' Year.

Frozen to Death

Or the Cottage on the Hill.

A Christmas Story.

CHAPTER I.

The last strain of the grand old Christmas hymn had just been warbled forth from the throats
and hearts of a number of happy folks, who were seated around the blazing log one Christmas
eve; and on the face of each one of that family circle the cheering light revealed the look
of happiness; the young--happy in the present, and indulging in hopeful anticipations for the
future; the old,--equally happy as the young, and revelling in many a darling memory of the past.

"Come, Uncle John!" said a bright-eyed, flaxen-haired beauty, over whose head not more than
ten Christmas days had passed,--"Come, uncle, do tell us a story; you know that we always expect
one from you." 

As a rule I am not one to peer over shoulders and read other people's letters or papers. But when
one is in a queue waiting for one's passport to be viséd, and when one has been there for an
hour and still seems no nearer to the promised land, and when it is the second time in the
day that one has been in a queue for the same purpose--once in France
and once in England--why, some little deflection from the narrow path
of perfect propriety may be forgiven.

Moreover in other ways I behaved better than many of my fellow-travellers, for I stood loyally
behind the man in front of me in my due place, and did not, as others
did, insinuate myself from the side into positions to which, by all
the laws of precedence and decency, they were disentitled.

Indeed I even caught myself wondering whether, had I any preferential opportunities of getting
through first, as some Red Cross and otherwise influential people had, I should make use of
them. To take any advantage of this weary waiting line of suspects, of which I was one, would
have been almost monstrous.

So, standing there all patiently and dejected, moving forward a foot
or so every four or five minutes, no wonder that I found myself reading
the embarkation paper which the gentleman in front of me had filled
up and was holding so legibly before him.

He was tall and solid and calm and French, with a better cut coat than most Frenchmen, even the
aristocrats, trouble about. He was broad-shouldered and erect, and I was piqued to find him, for
all his iron-grey hair, five years younger than myself. His name was--never mind; but I know
it. His profession was given as publicist--as though he were Mr. ARNOLD WHITE or Sir HENRY NORMAN,
although, for all I know, Sir HENRY NORMAN may by now be a Brigadier-General. His reasons for visiting
England, given in English, were in connection with his profession.

But after that his English broke down; for when it came to the question what was his sex, how
do you think he had answered it? I consider that his solution of the difficulty was an ample reward
to me--and to you, if you too have any taste in terminological exactitude--for
my fracture of a social convention.

The word he had wanted was either "male" or "masculine"; but they had evaded him. He had then
cast about for English terminology associated with men, and had thought
vaguely of master and mister.

The result was that the line ran thus:--"Sex: Masterly."

And, looking at the publicist's soigné moustache and firm jaw and
broad hands, I could believe it.

But what an inspiration! And, dear me! what will the Panks, if there are any left, say?

* * * * *

"To Teachers and Business Ladies. Heathful Holiday in North Wales; brainy air."

Provincial Paper.

Think what it has done for Mr. LLOYD GEORGE.

* * * * *

* * * * *

IDENTIFICATION.

How often the kind of thing occurs that I am about to describe!

Four or five summers ago, before the world went mad, I was on one of DAVID MACBRAYNE'S steamers
on the way to a Scotch island. Among the few passengers was an interesting
man, with whom I fell into conversation. He was a vigorous, bulky,
very tall man, with a pointed grey beard and a mass of grey hair under
a panama, and he was bound, he told me, for a well-known fishing-lodge,
whither he went every August. He had been a great traveller and knew
Persia well; he had also been in Parliament, and one of his sons was
in the siege of Mafeking. So much I remember of his affairs; but his
name I did not learn. We talked much about books, and I put him on
to DOUGHTY'S Arabia Deserta.

I have often thought of him since and
wondered who he was, and whenever I have met fishermen or others likely
to be acquainted with this attractive and outstanding personality
I have asked about him; but never with success. A jug of herb tea is on the table.
The fire is very low, and the light from it is only sufficient to render all indistinctly visible.
In a chair opposite is a young woman with such a mournful, careworn face, that a glance inspires
you with sorrow; and from a bundle of clothes on her knee issues the fretful wail of a restless
child. The monotonous tick of an old clock is the only sound, saving the longdrawn sigh of
that young mother, or the quick, hollow breathing of the sleeping man. Now and then the wind
whistles more shrilly through the crevices of the door, and the rain beats with greater force
against the little window. The mother draws still nearer to the few red embers, and turns a
timid glance to the window and then to the bed: another sigh, and then the overburdened heart
overflows at her eyes, and the large bright drops fall quickly on that dearly loved infant.

The church clock chimes a quarter after six--this rouses the mother once more to set aside
her own griefs; the wind still howls, and the rain beats with unabated fury against the glass:
her thoughts are of those little ones, and a tremor passes over her as she fears lest they
should be shut out. The man moves wearily in his bed, and opening his eyes, he looks towards
his wife. She is at his side in an instant.

"Have they gooan, Bessy?" he asks.

"Eea, they've gooan, an' aw hooap ther thear before nah."

"It saands vary wild. We ne'er thowt it ud come to this twelve year sin, Bess,--an' it's all
along o' me!"

"Nay, Jim, tha munnot say soa--tha knows we can nooan on us help bein poorly sometimes, but
when spring comes tha'll pick up thi crumbs agean, an' things 'll be different."

"That's true, lass,--aw feel that's true--things will be different when spring comes, an' afoor
it comes, aw'm feeard. Has ta iver been i' bed to-neet?"

"Nay, aw couldn't come to bed, 'coss th' child wor cross, but aw've slept a bit i' th' cheer:
dooant thee bother, aw'l look after mi sen. Will ta have a sup o' this teah?"

"Whisht!" he said, "that's awr Susy callin, aw'm sure it is! Oppen th' door!"

She flew to oppen th' door, and the storm rushed in with fury; the snow had begun to fall thickly:
she strained her eyes and called, "Susy! Susy!" but she heard no response: yet her heart misgave
her, for the thoughts of her darlings being exposed to such a storm made her shudder; but necessity
knows no law, and on the slender earnings of these two children depended the subsistence of
herself and husband.

"Aw think tha wor mistakken, Jim: aw con see nowt," she said, as she returned and closed the door.

"Well, happen aw wor; but it's a sorry mornin to turn aght two little lambs like them. Bessy,"
he said, lowering his voice to a whisper, "aw know aw'm i'th' gate,--aw con do nowt but lig
i' bed, an' aw know 'at thee an' th' childer have to goa short mony a time for what aw get,
but it willn't be for long. Dooant rooar! tha knows it's summat 'at we've nowt to do wi; an'
tha heeard what th' parson said, 'Ther's One aboon at 'll work all things together for gooid,'
an' aw feel my time's commin' varry near; but aw'm nooan freetened like aw used to be; aw think
it's gooin to be a change for th' better--an' He'll luk after thee an' th' little ens."

"O! Jim! tha munnot talk abaght leavin us yet; tha'll be better in a bit."

"Niver i' this world, Bessy! Come, put thi heead o' th' pillow here beside me, aw think aw
want to rest."

She placed the little babe upon the coverlet, laid her head upon the pillow, and worn out with
watching, she wept herself asleep.

The church clock had chimed the half-hour before Tom and his little sister landed at the mill
yard, and it was closed. The storm was still raging, but to his repeated entreaties for admission
the same answer was returned, "Tha'rt too lat! tha connot come in afoor th' braikfast." Experience
had taught him how vain his endeavours would be to obtain admission; and had it been himself
alone that was shut out, he would have gone quietly away and spent the time as best he might;
but he felt emboldened by the responsibility that was upon him on his sister's account, and
he redoubled his efforts, but the timekeeper was inexorable:--"My orders iz, az nubdy mun come
in after a quarter past, an' if tha doesn't goa away aw'l warm thi Jacket for thi; tha should
ha come i' time same as other fowk." Poor Tom! there had still lingered some little faith in
the goodness of human nature in his breast, but as he turned away, the last spark died out.
To attempt to go home he knew would be useless, and therefore he sought as the only alternative,
some place where he might find shelter. At a short distance from the gate, but within the sound
of the whirling wheels, he sat down with his uncomplaining sister upon his knee. The snow began
to fall gently at first, and he watched it as the feathery flakes grew larger and larger. He
did not feel cold now; he wrapped his little scarf around his sister's neck. The snow fell
still thicker: he felt so weary, so very weary; his little sister too had fallen asleep on
his breast;--he laid his head against the cold stone wall, and the snow still fell, so softly,
so very gently, that he dozed away and dreamed of sunny lands where all was bright and warm:
and in a short time the passer-by could not have told that a brother and sister lay quietly
slumbering there, wrapped in their shroud of snow.

The hum of wheels has ceased; the crowd of labourers hurry out to their morning's meal; a few
short minutes, and the discordant whistles again shriek out their call to work. Tom and Susy,
where are they? The gates will soon be closed again!

Well, let them close! other gates have opened for those little suffering ones. The gates of
pearl have swung upon their golden hinges; no harsh voice of unkind taskmaster greets them
on their entrance, but that glorious welcome.

"Come, ye blessed!" and their unloosed tongues join in the loud "Hosannah."

But those pearly gates are not for ever open. The time may come when those shall stand before
them unto whom the words, "Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it
not to me," shall sound the death-knell of all hopes throughout an inconceivable eternity.

CHAPTER II.

It is night, and the wind is sighing itself away. The snow has ceased to fall, and the moon
looks down upon the hills in their spotless covering, shedding her soft, mild light upon all.
The little cottage on the hill side would be imperceptible, were it not for the light that
streams through the window and the open door. The church clock has just struck eight, and for
nearly an hour a woman has stood looking towards the town, her anxiety increasing every moment.
She listens to the sound of feet on the crisp snow--they come nearer--they are opposite the
turn that leads to the cottage: but they pass on. Again and again she listens:--once or twice
she fancies she sees two children in the distance--but they come not. Passersby become less
frequent; again the church clock chimes, and all is still. Her husband and her babe are asleep.
Quickly putting on her bonnet and shawl, she runs to her nearest rleighbour to ask if she will
sit with them until she returns, for she must go and learn how it is that her children have
not come home. She fears no denial, and she meets with none; as soon as she has stated her
case, the good woman replies, "Sit wi' 'em lass! aw'm sure aw will! an' thee," she said, turning
to her husband, "put on thi hat an' coit an' goa wi' her."

"O, they're nobbut laikin at snowball, or else slurrin a bit," he said;--at the same time he
put on his hat and coat, and showed as much alacrity to join in the search as the mother herself.

Owd Becca thrust into her capacious pocket a tea cake and two eggs, and taking the teapot into
which she put a good supply of tea, she prepared for starting off; but suddenly recollecting
herself, she returned and called in loud tones to her daughter: "Sarah I get that sucking bottle,
an' fill it wi' milk for th' little en, an' nah, if yo two 'll nobbut bring th' childer back,
aw'l see 'at all gooas on reight at hooam."

Bessy began to express her thanks, but Becca was determined not to hear her, and drowned all
she said in exhorting her husband to "luk sharp." Bessy and Old Abe directed their steps to
the factory, but often paused to ask passers-by if they had seen the two lost ones, but as
there had so many children passed whose outward appearance corresponded with theirs of whom
they were in search, they thought it best to go at once to the works and ascertain at what
time they left.

Bessy's heart misgave her as she knocked at the gatekeeper's house; an indefinable dread came
over her, and she scarce knew how to state her case. Little did she think that within sound
of her voice lay the dear objects of her search; hundreds of feet had passed them during the
day, but none had disturbed them; the whistles had screamed for them in vain, for they had
gone to that lasting "rest prepared for the weary and heavy laden." From the gatekeeper they
learned that the two had arrived too late in the morning and gone away somewhere, but had not
returned or been seen afterwards. Bessy stood transfixed for a moment, scarce knowing what
to do, but Old Abe could look at the case more calmly; and taking hold of her hand, he led
her gently away, and proceeded forthwith to the police station, where he gave as full an account
and as correct a description of the missing ones as he was able. It took but a short time to
accomplish this much, but the journey homewards was not so speedily performed. Every dark corner
was explored, and every alley and by-lane had to be traversed, and the morning was far advanced
when they reached home after their unsuccessful search.

The husband and babe were still sleeping, for Becca had ministered to all their wants. She
had buoyed herself with the hope that they would be successful: but when she saw them return
alone, her spirits sank as low as those of the mother, and although she was silent, yet the
frequent application of the apron to her eyes showed that she felt as a mother for one so sorrowfully
placed.

Promising to "luk in i' th' morn'," they left the disconsolate Bessy to her grief.

Who shall attempt to describe the anguish of that bereaved parent? Statuelike she sat, nursing
a sorrow too deep for tears. Hours passed, and the first faint streak of dawn found her still
sitting, with her eyes intently fixed on vacancy. Her husband's voice was the first thing that
roused her from the state of despondency into which she had sunk. He spoke with difficulty,
and his voice was feeble as a child's. "Bessy," he gasped, "tha munnot leave me ony moor. It's
drawin varry near. Awr little Tom an' Susy have been here wol tha's been off; aw heeard 'em
calling for me, but aw could'nt goa until aw'd had a word wi' thee. Aw'm feeard tha'll tak
it hard, lass, but if tha finds tha cannot bide it, ax th' parson to tell thee what he tell'd
to me, an' it'll comfort thee." Bessy was unable to reply. Sorrows had been heaped upon her
so heavily that her feelings were benumbed; she scarcely comprehended what was said, but in
the bitterness of her soul she fell upon her knees and sobbed--"Lord, help me!"

Her husband feebly took her hand and drew her towards him. "He will help thee, lassie, niver
fear. One kiss, Bessy; gooid bye! Tom! Susy!--It's varry dark.--Aw think aw want to sleep."--

   "And ere that hour departed.
   All death reveals, he knew."

CHAPTER III.

A change had taken place in the atmosphere since Bessy and Abe had returned. Here and there
green patches could be seen on the hill side, and the distant town presented a view of smoke-blackened
roofs that shone, dripping with wet as the sickly' sun glanced over them. Little or no snow
was to be found in the streets, and all the hideous sights stood out once more rejoicing in
their naked deformities.

The giant engine--the factory's heart--was ceasing to beat once more, in order to allow the
workers time to swallow the food necessary to enable them to bear up until noon. The gates
were opened, and the crowd swarmed forth, but all seemed instinctively directed to a group
at a short distance, whose pallid faces reflected the ghastly sight before them. The group
soon swelled to a vast crowd. Enquiries were made on every hand by those in the outer circle--"What
is it? what is it?" "Frozen to death." Tenderly those rough handed, rough-spoken men raised
the death-frozen little ones. Some there were who knew them and had heard of their loss. It
was to them an easy task to account for their deaths, and curses low but deep were cast on
them, at whose doors the blood of those innocents must lie.

The bodies were taken to the nearest inn to wait an inquest. Those in authority were quickly
on the alert; whilst some who were acquainted with the parents prepared to carry them the sorrowful
tidings.--Poor Bessy! thy cup of bitterness is nearly full!

Old Becca had come according to promise, and found Bessy laid partially upon the bed in a swoon,
her arm around the neck of him who had been her faithful partner for a dozen years. She raised
her, bathed her forehead, and used all means in her power to promote her recovery. After a
short time she was successful; and having prepared the other bed and placed Bessy upon it,
she hastily left to get some assistance.

The poor have but the poor on whom they can depend in an emergency; and it is a blessing that
the request for help to each other is rarely if ever made in vain.

She soon returned with plenty of willing hands--one took the babe, and others remained to perform
the last sad offices to the remains of him who had gone "a little while before." Soon the men
arrived with the mournful account of the discovery of the children, but Bessy knew it not.
God had had compassion upon her, and to save her heart from breaking, had thrown a cloud over
her reason.

Silently they stood for a moment in that house of death; and as they turned to go, one after
another placed what money each had, noiselessly upon the table: the whole perhaps did not amount
to much, but who shall say that it was not a welcome loan to the Lord--an investment in heaven
that should in after time yield to them an interest outweighing the wealth of the whole world?

As the day advanced, numbers gathered round the inn where the coroner and jury were assembled.
The usual form of viewing the bodies was gone through; and, with the exception of the girl's
ancle, which was found to be dislocated, there appeared nothing to account for death save exposure
to the cold.

The coroner quickly summed up, and addressing the jury said--"he did not see how they could
bring in any other verdict than 'died from natural causes.'" With one exception all acquiesced,
and this one refused to agree to such a verdict, saying that death had been caused by unnatural
causes! At last the verdict was altered to "Found frozen to death." To this a juryman wished
to add something about arbitrary laws and inhumanity, but he was overruled.

It needed nothing now but to put them in the earth, and cover them up.

The following morning the whistles shrieked as fiercely, the wheels went round as merrily as
ever; two other children were in the places of the lost ones, and it was as if they had never been.

The day for the funeral arrived--the father and children were to be interred together. There
was a large gathering of sympathising friends. Poor Bessy! had partially recovered, but seemed
like one just waking from a dream; the mournful cortege gained the church yard. The coffins
were slowly lowered into the grave. The grey-haired pastor's voice was at times almost inaudible--every
heart was touched, for all took the case home to themselves, and asked the question, "How if
they were mine?" "Dust to dust, and ashes to ashes," and the ceremony was completed.

Few of them had failed to remark the presence of a strange mourner--one whose dress bespoke
him to be a gentleman; and as the widow turned to leave the grave, he stept up to her and offered
her his arm for support. She took it mechanically, and wended her way to her desolate home.
He was the only one, with the exception of Old Becca, who entered with Bessy.

He looked around the forlorn room, gazing now here, now there, to hide his emotion. He seemed
about to speak when a knock at the door interrupted him.

Becca opened it, and returned with a letter stating that the bearer required an answer. The
stranger took it with an air of authority and broke the seal; as he did so, a five pound note
fluttered to the ground. While he read the letter his eyes flashed with a strange fire, and
his quivering nostril showed the strength of the passion raging within.

Turning to the boy, he thrust the letter into his hand, and bade him pick up the note. "Take
this answer to your master, boy," he said; "we return the letter and his money with disdain,
and tell him that Bessy Green is not so desolate and friendless that she needs accept five
pounds as the price of two innocent lives. The debt is one that no man can cancel: but the
reckoning day is sure to come! tell him that, boy, from the brother of Bessy Green, from the
uncle of Tom and Susy."

The boy hurried away with the message; and Bessy, who had been aroused by the stranger's vehemence,
at the word "brother," threw herself upon his neck, crying--"It is George!" What follows is
quickly told: Bessy's grief was deep, and it took long long months before she was fitted to
engage in the ordinary occupations of life; but change of scene and cheerful company, together
with the daily expanding beauties of her only child, partially healed her lacerated heart.
Her generous brother, who had returned from a distant land,--where fortune had smiled upon
his labours--took her to live with him, and adopted her child as his son. Becca and Abe became
also installed in the house as helpers; and now, far away from the regions of factory whews,
they are all living amicably together.

"That is my story for this; Christmas. How do you like it?"

It is very sorrowful, uncle John, but we are much obliged to you for telling it us, but it
is surely wrong for children so young to be compelled to go to work at such an early hour?

"It may not be wrong to require them so to do, but it would at least show a desire on the part
of the employers to ameliorate the hardness of their lot if, while endeavouring to enforce
strict punctuality, they would provide some shelter for those who, having come from a distance,
fail to arrive in time for admission."

"Hark, the village Waits!"

Pill Jim's Progress Wi' Johns Bunion.

It wor a varry wild day when John set off to see Pill Jim, as he wor called, but as it wor
varry particklar business, he didn't let th' weather stop him.

Nah, Pill Jim wor a varry nooated chap i' some pairts o' Yorkshire. He wor an old chap, an'
lived in a little haase to hissen, an' gate a livin' wi' quack-docterin' a bit; an' whativer
anybody ailed, he'd some pills at wor sure to cure 'em; soa, as John had been sufferin' a long'
time, he thought he'd goa an' have a bit o' tawk wi' him, an' see if he could get any gooid done.

It chonced, as luck let, at Jim wor at hooam, an' he invited him in, but as he'd nobbut one
cheer, John had to sit o'th' edge o'th' long table.

"Well, John," he sed, "an' what's browt thee here this mornin'?"

"Nay, nowt 'at means mich, Jim; but aw've heeard a gooid deal o' tawk abaght thy pills, an'
aw thowt they'd happen do me a bit o' gooid; but aw wanted to have a bit o' tawk to thee th'
first abaght it, for tha knows one sooart o' physic doesn't do for iverybody."

"Tha'rt just mistakken abaght that, John, for my pills cure owt; they're oppenin' pills, an'
although aw'm a chap 'at doesn't like to crack abaght misen, aw con just tell thee a thing
or two 'at'll mak thee stare."

"Well, that's what aw want, Jim, s'oa get on wi' thy tellin'."

"Aw hardly know whear to begin, but, hasumiver, aw'll tell thee one thing: ther's lots o' fowk
livin' raand abaght here 'at's been oppen'd by em, an' to some tune too; an' although aw consider
physic an evil at all times, still my pills must be regarded as a necessary evil. A chap once
coom to see me, an' browt a lot o' oysters, but he wor fast ha to get into 'em; aw made noa
moor to do but just put two or three pills amang 'em, an' they wor oppen'd in a minit. He sed
he'd niver seen sich a thing afoor. An' if tha con keep a secret, aw'll tell thi summat else
but tha munnot split. One neet just at th' end o' last summer, a queer-lukkin' chap coom an'
sed he didn't feel vary weel, an' he'd come to me becoss he didn't want tother doctors to know;
soa aw axed him who he wor. He didn't like to tell me for a bit, but at last he sed' he wor
th' Clerk o'th' Weather Office, an' he'd just getten a day off, bi th' way ov a leetnin'.'
'Well,' aw says, 'aw'll gie yo a box o' pills, an' yo mun tak two ivery neet.' He thanked me
an' went away, an' aw've niver seen a wink on him sin, but tha may be sure it's them pills
'at we have to thank for sich a oppen winter as we've had, for as aw sed befoor, they'll oppen
owt."

"Well, Jim, tha fair caps me! Aw wonder tha hasn't made a fortun befoor nah! But aw dooant
think aw want ony pills, tho' aw'm badly enough."

"Why, what does ta ail? Has ta getten th' backwark, or th' heeadwark, or does ta feel wamly
sometimes an' cannot ait?"

"Nawther, John; it's summat else nor that."

"Why, is it summat 'at tha has o' thi mind!"

"Noa, it isn't mi mind, it's mi understandin' 'at's 'sufferin'. Th' fact is, Jim, aw'm troubled
wi' a bunion."

"Let's luk at it," says Jim, "ther's nowt easier to cure nor a bunion."

John took off his shoe an' stockin', an' when Jim saw it he sed, "Oh, aw see what it wants;
it wants bringin' to a heead."

"Well, aw think bi th' rate it's growin', it'll be a heead afoor long, for it's as big as mi
neive already."

"Nah, aw'll tell thee what tha mun do. Tak five or six o' thease pills ivery neet till tha
feels a bit ov a difference, an' when tha gooas to bed tha mun put thi fooit into a pooltice,
an' tha'll find it'll get better as it mends."

"Well, aw think ther's some sense i' what tha says, soa aw think aw'll try some; ha does ta
sell 'em?"

"If tha buys a box they're a penny, but they corne in cheaper to buy 'em bi weight, an' as
its thee aw'll let thi have a pund for a shillin'; if it wor onybody else, they'd be sixteen
pence."

"Well, aw'll tak a pund, onyway. An' if aw can't tak 'em all misen, they'll happen be useful
to somdy else."

"Tha mun tak 'em all thisen, an' then tha'll feel th' benefit on em," sed Jim.

"Well," sed John, when he'd getten 'em teed up in his hankerchy, "aw wish yo gooid day, an
aw'll come an' see yo in a bit to repoort progress."

John limped hooam as weel as he could, an' after puttin' th' pills into a pint basin i'th'
cubbard, he went to bed. His wife axed him what he could like to his supper, but he sed he
worn't particklar, soa shoo went daanstairs, an' when shoo luk'd i'th' cubbard, shoo saw this
basin o' pills, but shoo thowt they wor pays; soa shoo gate a bit o' mutton an' made a sup
o' broth an' put 'em in; an' when they'd been boilin' awhile shoo couldn't find 'em hardly.
"Why," shoo sed, "aw niver saw sich pays as theease i' all mi life; they've all boiled to smush."
Shoo tuk him a basinful upstairs, an' after a spooinful or two, he sed he thowt they tasted
rayther queer. "Oh! it's thi maath at's aght o' order, mun," shoo sed; "get 'em into thee,
they're sure to do thee gooid."

John tew'd hard wi' 'em an' at last he finished 'em. "Niver buy ony moor pays at that shop,"
he sed, "for aw'm sure they're nooan reight.

"Aw didn't buy 'em," shoo sed, "they're what wor i'th' cubbard; aw thowt tha'd put 'em thear
thisen."

When John heeard that, he knew in a minit what shoo'd done, an' he stared at her.

"What are ta staring at, wi' thi een an' thi maath wide oppen like that?" sed his wife.

"Tha'd ha' thi een an' thi maath oppen if tha'd swallowed what aw have," he said, "for they'll
oppen ewt."

John gate up an' dressed an' went aght, an' as he didn't offer to come back, his wife an' two
or three ov his mates went to seek him; an' a few yards off th' door they fan his clooas an'
hat an' a pair o' booits, an' in one o'th' booits they fan a bunion,--an' that wor all ther
wor left o' John.

It wor rayther a awkard thing to swear to, but his wife sed shoo couldn't be mistakken, for
shoo knew it soa weel wol shoo'd be bun to be able to pick it aght ov a looad o' new puttates.
Ov cooarse, they'd a inquest, but as ther wor noa evidence, an' sich a case had niver been
known befoor, they returned a oppen verdict.

A few days after, as Pill Jim wor gooin' past th' church yard, he saw a chap oppenin' a grave,
an' axed him who he wor oppenin' it for; an' when he heeard it wor for th' remains o' poor
John, he muttered to hissen, "Noa wonder! noa wonder! them pills, they'll oppen owt. Aw wor
sure they'd awther drive th' bunion away throo John, or John away throo th' bunion, which wor
for th' best aw connot tell; its an oppen question-- them pills leeave ivery--thing oppen."

Moravian Knight's Entertainment.

If yo want to know owt abaght me, let me tell yo 'at they called mi father Knight, an' when
aw wor born he had me kursend Moravian; but noa sooiner did aw begin to laik wi' th' lads abaght
ner aw began to be called Morry Neet. Soa mich abaght misen.

Aw oft think 'at fowk mak a sad mistak, i' spendin all ther time leearnin. Aw think if them
'at know soa mich had to spend part o' ther time taichin other fowk what they know, th' world
mud ha' fewer philosophers, but it 'ud have fewer fooils. As that's my nooation, awve detarmined
to let yo know ha aw gate on th' furst time aw went to a penny readin, an' may be somdy 'll
leearn summat bi that.

Awd seen a lot o' bills stuck up for mony a day, statin' at th' 16th select penny readin' wor
to tak place i'th' Jimmy Loin National Schooil, an' aw thowt awd goa. Soa when th' neet coom
aw went to th' door aw clap daan mi penny like a mon, an' wor walkin in--

"Stop! Stop!" shaated aght th' brass takker, "Tha mun come back, tha's nobbut gien me a penny."

"Aw know aw've nobbut gien thee a penny," aw says; "Ha mich moor does ta want? Its a penny
readin, isn't it?"

"Eea, its a penny readin, but its thrippince to goa in," he sed.

"Well, if that's it," aw says, "here's tother tuppince, but awm blowed if aw see it." But aw
went in, an' a rare hoilful ther wor. In a bit Alderman Nonowt wor vooated into th' cheer,
an' then he made a speech--

"Ladies and Gentlemen--(then he coughed two or three times, an' supt o' watter),--I can assure
you 'at nothink gives me greater pleasure, or greater enjoyment, or I might say greater satisfaction,
(a varry deal o' clappin i'th' front seeats--supt twice), when I look around me, ladies and
gentlemen, and see so many old and familiar faces that I have never seen before, and when I
see so many strangers that I have passed long years of social intercourse amongst, I feel,
ladies and gentlemen, I feel moved, very much moved, and when I gaze again I begin to feel
removed. Our object which we have in view, in keeping agate of giving these here readings,
are to throw open the doors of knowledge, so that all may come and drink from the inexhaustible
bottle, so to speak, ladies and gentleman, which says 'drink and thirst no more' (great cheering--women
wi' cleean pocket hankerchies blow ther nooases). These meetings have also another himportant
object, a nobject noble and great, which is namely, to draw people out of the public houses,
and create a thirst in them for wisdom. How many men, after a hard day's work, go and sit in
the public house, or what is still worse, often spend their time at some thripny concert room
until nine or ten o'clock, whereas now they can come here and sit until 10 or 11 o'clock, where
they are not only hentertained, but hedicated and hedified. With thease few remarks, I call
upon the first reader for a solo on the German concertina."

An' it wor a solo! It reminded me o' being in a bazaar at Fair time, an' abaght a thaasand
childer blowin penny trumpets; an' he whewd his arms abaght like a windmill; an' aw wor nooan
sooary when he'd done. But fowk clapt an' stamped wol he coom back agean; an' he bow'd an'
sed he'd give 'em an immitation o'th' backpipe, an' awve noa daat it wor varry like it, for
awm sure noa frontpipe iver made as faal a din. After that th' cheerman made a few remarks
an' sed, music had charms to soothe the savage beast, an' he'd no doubt we all felt soothed
with what we had heard. He had now the pleasure to call for something of a more elevating nature
still. The next reading would be a comic song. "Up in a balloon boys."

Th' chap 'at gave that wor varry wise, for as sooin as he'd begun singin' he shut his een an'
niver oppened 'em agean till he'd done, an' if he'd kept his maath shut aw should ha' been
better suited still. Ov coorse he wor honcored, an' he coom back an' sang "Be--e--eutifool
oil of the Se--e--e--he!" wol he fair fooamd at th' maath, but awl wave mi opinion o' that.
Then coom th' gem o'th' evening, an' th' chap wor a gem 'at sang it. Th' cheerman sed he was
always proud to be able to sit an' listen to such like, for it show'd what a deal better world
ther might be if we all did our best for one another.

Th' peanner struck up, an' a chap in a big white hat an' longlapp'd coit sang "What aw did
for Hannah," an' afoor he'd finished aw thowt if he'd done hauf as mich for Hannah as he'd
done for us he owt to be shot. But when a chap's i' favor he con do owt, an' when he'd done
an' been called back three times, th' cheerman sed it wor now his duty to introduce the Rev'd
Dowell to read a selection from Heenuck Harden.

As sooin as he'd sed this ivery body began to walk aght, an' soa as aw thowt they must be gooin
into another raam to hear it, aw went aght too. But when awd getten aghtside aw saw they wor
all awther leetin ther pipes or laikin at soddin one another. Aw axed one on 'em if it wor
all over. "Net it," he sed, "we've nobbut come aght wol yond dry old stick has done talking.
Th' best pairt o'th' entertainment has to come off yet! Ther's three single step doncers gooin
to contest for a copy ov 'Baxter's Saint's Rest,' bun up wi' gilt edges."

When aw heeard that aw ihowt, well, awm nooa saint misel, but if awm a sinner awl have a bit
o' rest, whether it's Baxter's or net. Soa aw walked quitely off hooam, thinkin ha thankful
we owt to be at fowk 'll labor as they do to improve an elevate poor workin' fowk. That wor
th' end o' my entertainment.

Sperrit Rappin.

Did yo iver goa to a sperrit rappin' doo? Aw did once, but aw can't say it wor mich i' my line.

It happen'd one Setterdy neet 'at aw'd been to have a pint at th' "Rompin Kittlin," an' aw
heeard some chaps say 'at ther wor baan to be a meetin i'th' owd wayvin shop o'th' Sundy afternooin,
an' iver so mony mediums wor commin to tell all 'at wor gooin on i'th' tother world, soa as
awd nowt else to do, aw went, an' after a bit o' thrustin aw managed to get into a front seat:
but they wor varry particlar who they let in. As aw wor set, waitin for th' performance to
begin, aw thowt it luk'd varry mich like a inquest, for ther wor one chap set o'th' end o't'
table, an' six daan each side; an' they wor a lot o'th' rummest lukkin fowk aw'd seen for a
long time. They all seem'd as if they wanted sendin aght to grass, for ther faces wor th' color
ov a lot o' tallow craps. In a bit they started, an' we all sang a hymn, an' varry weel it
wor sung too, considerin 'at that radical gravestoan letterer joined in it; for if ther is
ony body 'at can throw a whole congregation aght o' tune, its owd Cinnamon, for he owt niver
to oppen his maath onywhear unless all th' fowk is booath deeaf an' blind, for th' seet o'
his chowl is enuff to drive all th' harmony aght ov a meetin. Aw dar wager a trifle 'at he'd
be able to spoil th' Jubilee. But as aw wor sayin, we did varry weel considerin, an' then th'
cheerman gate up an' addressed a few words to us. He sed he'd noa daat 'at ther wor a goaid
many amang us 'at didn't believe i' sperrits, but he could assure us 'at ther wor moor i' sperrits
sometimes nor what we imagined. He sed he knew one man 'at had been under th' influence ov
a sperit, 'at went hooam an' tell'd his wife sich things 'at made her hair stand ov an end,
an' when he gate up next mornin he knew nowt abaat it till he saw his wife wor i'th' sulks,
an' he ax'd her "what ther wor to do." "Ther's plenty to do, aw think," shoo says; "ha can
ta fashion to put thi heead aght o'th' door? But tha can have yond nasty gooid-for-nawt as
soain as tha likes, for awst leeave thi if aw live wol awm an haar older! It's a bonny come
off, 'at me at's barn ommoss a duzzen children to thi should be shoved o' one side far a thing
like yond!" "Why, lass, aw doant know what tha'rt talking abaat," he sed, "tell me what tha
meeans!" "Aw've noa need to tell thi," shoo sed, "tha knows weel enuff, an' aw believe ivery
word 'at tha sed, for they say 'at druffen chaps an' childer allus spaik th' truth, an' awve
suspicioned yond Betty for a long time! What reight has shoo to be dawdlin abaat other fowks
husbands for? If shoo wants a felly, let her get one ov her own! But tha may tak her an' welcome,
an' mich gooid may shoo do thi, an' may yo allus be as happy together as aw wish vo--an' noa
happier! drot her!" "Why, did aw say owt abaat Betty? Tha mun tak noa nooatice o' owt aw say
when aw come hooam throo a meetin, tha sees, sin aw wor made a medium, aw ammot allus just
i' mi reight senses, an' it isn't me 'at spaiks, it's what's in me." "Eea, an' it wor what
wor in thi 'at spaik last neet! Tha's noa need to tell me 'at tha worn't i' thi reight wit,
for tha hasn't been that for a long time but aw can tell thi one thing--if tha'rt a medium,
awm net gooin to be made one! aw'll awther be one thing or tother, soa if tha'd rayther have
yond mucky trolly, tak her; an' may yo booath have a seed i' yor tooith an' corns o' yor tooas,
an' be fooarsed to walk daan th' hill, all th' days o' yor lives; that's what aw wish." He
talked to her for a long time, but it wor noa use, for yo see shoo'd niver been enlightened,
an' all he could say didn't convince her 'at he worn't answerable for all he'd sed an' done;
but ov cooarse it's weel known 'at mediums arn't responsible for owt. After a few moor remarks,
an' relatin a few moor incidents, he sed "it wor abaat time to begin the serious business 'at
had called us together, an' he sed he hooap'd 'at if ony had came to scoff, they'd remain to
pay, for they wor sadly i' need o' funds, an' he hooap'd 'at iverybody wod respond liberally,
for sperits sich as they dealt in could not be getten o' trust, although they had to be takken
that way." Then he knock'd th' table three times wi' his knuckles, an' two o'th' fiddle-faced
chaps 'at wor set one o' each side on him, began to wriggle abaat as if they'd getten th' murly
grubs. "Stop! stop!" he sed, "one at once, if yo pleease! Brother Sawny had better give his
sperit backward for a few minutes, wol we've done wi' Brother Titus's." Soa Sawny gave ovver
shakkin hissen, exceptin his heead, an' jumpin onto his feet, he sed, "If awve allus to give
way to Titus, awm blow'd if awl come to edify yor lot ony longer." "Husht, husht!" says th'
cheerman, "the sperit has takken possession o' Titus already. Will ony o'th' unbelievers ax
it a few questions?" Soa aw thowt aw mud as weel be forrad as onybody else, soa aw stood up
an' ax'd it furst--

"What did they use to call thi?"

"Mary Jane Wittering."

"Ha long is it since tha deed?"

(Noa answer; soa th' cheerman sed it wor a varry frivolous an' improper question, an' aw mud
ax summat else.)

"Wor ta iver wed?"

"Nobbut three times."

"Wor ta allus true to 'em when tha had 'em?"

(No answer; th' cheerman shook his neive at me.)

"Are they livin or deead?"

"One's deead, one's livin, an' one's a medium."

"Has ta met anybody tha knows up i' yor pairts?"

"Monny a scoor."

"Are they happy or miserable?"

"Some one way an' some another."

"Has ta seen onybody at's come latly?"

"Nubdy but a chap they call 'Profit."

"What did they call him 'Profit' for?"

"Aw doant know, unless it's becoss he did soa weel aght o' collectin th' rates afoor he coom here."

"Is he happy?"

"Nut exactly, he's undergooin his punishment, poor chap."

"What is it?"

"He's shut up i'th dark for as monny year as he's charged fowk for feet o' gas 'at they've
niver burned; an' bi what awve heeard some o'th older end o'th sperits say, it seems varry
likely 'at eternity will ha getten farish in, befoor he sees leet agean."

"Is he tormented wi' owt?"

"Nowt but his conscience."

"Ha's that?"

"He hadn't one when he coom, soa he's had to tak one at's been left bi somdy else, an' it pricks
him sadly."

"Then it seems his brass willn't save him?"

"Noa, for yo know, 'Wi whatsoever metre yo measure, to yo it'll be measured agean."

"Is ther owt to ait an' drink i' yor quarter?"

"Noa, they've shut all th' shops up, an' it's time they shut thine up, for aw'm stall'd o'
tawkin to thi?"

Aw wor baan to ax him summat else, but he began to wriggle agean, an' th' cheerman sed th'
sperit wor takkin its departure, an' in a minute he oppened his een, an luk'd raand as sackless
as if he had nobbut just wakken'd. "Nah, my dear friend," sed th' cheerman, turnin an' spaikin
to me, "aw hooap yo're satisfied. Does ta believe i' what this sperit has communicated?"

"Well," aw says, "to tell the th' truth, aw can't say 'at aw awther believe in it or net, for
aw've noa proof, but if aw sed owt aw should be inclined to say 'net'--but still it saands
varry likely what one might expect, an' that's all aw can say abaat it at present."

"Be sure tha comes to awr meetin next Sundy," he sed, "an' aw can see 'at tha'll sooin be one
on us." An' for that reason aw niver went agean, for aw couldn't help thinkin 'at if aw wanted
to be a medium for sperits, 'at awd rayther get a owd licensed haase an' start reight.

Wol this had been gooin on, awd heeard a chap an' his wife, 'at sat cloise to me, talkin a
gooid deal, an' aw varry sooin fan aght 'at shoo wor tryin to mak him believe as mich i' sperits
as shoo did, an' ivery time th' medium answered one o' my questions shoo nudged him, an' sed
"Does ta hear that? Its ivery word as true as gospel? Does ta believe it nah?" After shoo'd
axed him two or three times, he sed, "Well, its varry wonderful, an' aw do begin to think 'at
there's summat in it." "A'a!" shoo sed, "aw knew tha'd believe if aw could get thi to come."
It wor Sawney's turn next to be entranced, as they call it, an' as sooin as th' sperit had
takken possession on him (which seemed to be a varry hard task, an' aw dooant know wether it
went in at his maath or whear), this woman 'at set aside o' me jumped up an' axed if shoo mud
be allowed to put a few questions.

Th' cheerman sed shoo mud an' welcome, soa shoo began--

"Ha old am aw?"--"Fifty-two."

"Am aw married or single?"--"Married."

"Ha monny childer have aw?"--"Four."

"Nah," shoo says, turning to her husband, "isn't it true?"

"Yos, its true enuff," he sed, "aw believe there's summat in it, but aw should like to ax a
question or two misen."

"Why, jump up, then, an' luk sharp an' start," shoo sed.

So he started--

"Ha old am aw?"--"Fifty-three."

"Nah then! didn't aw tell thi! does ta believe it nah?" shoo sed.

"Am aw married or single?"--"Married."

"True agean, tha sees," sed his wife.

"Ha monny childer have aw?"--"Two."

"Two! Then if my wife's four whose, is tother two?"

As sooin as shoo heeard that, an' befoor th' medium had time to spaik, shoo seized hold ov
her umbrella, an'lauped off her seat towards whear th' medium wor set, an' aw fancy if th'
umbrella nop had made acquaintance wi' his heead i'th' way shoo'd intended, 'at it wodn't ha
taen long to untrance that chap. But th' cheerman saw her comin, an' managed to stop it, but
it wor noa easy job to quieten her. "A'a, tha lyin gooid-for- nowt!" shoo sed, "has ta come
here slanderin daycent wimmin? Aw defy awther onybody i' this world or onybody i'th' tother
to say owt agean my karractur! Yor a lot o' himposters, ivery one on yo, that's what yo are!
Come on, Jim," shoo sed to her husband, as shoo seized hold ov his arm, "let us goa, its nooan
a fit place for gradely fowk."

"Dooant be i' sich a hurry," he sed, "aw begin to think ther's summat in it."

"Summat in it! Has ta noa moor sense nor to believe in a lot o' lyin vagabones like thease?
Let's get hooam, they're nooan fit spots for daycent fowk, an' aw hooap awst niver catch thi
i' one agean! Come on!"

"Why, tha browt me, didn't ta? an' tha seemd to believe in it."

"Eea, aw believed' em soa long as aw knew what they tell'd me wor true, but as sooin as they
start lyin, aw can't believe 'em then; but aw wish awd hold o' that chap's toppin, an' awd
shake th' truth aght on him, or else awd rive his heead off--nasty low-lived sneak as he is!
But come on hooam, an if tha waits wol aw bring thi agean, tha'll wait wol tha'rt a thaasand
year old, an moor ner that."

They went aght, an in a bit quietness wor restored.

After a few moor remarks, th' cheerman sed 'at it wor too far on i'th' day for ony moor sperits
to be sent for, for th' mediums had another meeting to attend that neet, soa he read aght another
hymn, an' we tried to sing it to th' tune ov "Sweet spirit, hear mi prayer," but we couldn't,
for Cinnamon wor too mich for us all--he wor a deal better brayer nor prayer, an' after one
or two moor tries, th' cheerman sed "'at unless that gentleman (lukkin at Cinnamon) wod awther
swallow a scaarin--stooan an' a pund o' sweet sooap to clear his voice, or else keep his maath
shut, we should have to leave singin aght o'th' question altogether." But Cinnamon worn't to
be put daan; an' he tell'd th' cheerman 'at if he didn't know what singin wor he did, an' when
he wor in Horstraly (A voice--"What does ta know abaat Horstraly, tupheead, tha niver went
noa farther ner Burtonheead i' all thi life"). This ryled Cim, an' he up wi' a stooil an' whew'd
it slap at th' cheerman. Aw saw ther wor likely to be a row, for whativer other sperit wor
thear, aw could see plain enuff 'at th' sperit o' mischief wor i' some on 'em, soa aw crept
up beside th' door an' pop'd aght, an' left 'em to settle it as they could.

Aw met Cinnamon th' next mornin, an' aw saw 'at he'd a gurt plaister ov his nooas, an' aw couldn't
help thinkin what a blessin it wod ha been to some fowk if it had been stuck ovver his maath
asteead.

Ther's a Mule I' th' Garden.

(This expression is one that I have often heard used in Yorkshire to some unpleasantness being
afoot.)

A Christmas Story.

Hark thi lass, what a wind! it's a long time sin we had sich a storm. Folk ought to be thankful
'at's getten a warm hearthstooan to put ther feet on, sich weather as this:--unless it alters
it'll be a dree Kursmiss-day.  If ony poor body has to cross this moor to neet, they'll be
lost, as sure as sure con be.

It's a fearful neet reight enuff, lad, an' it maks me creep cloiser to th' range,--but it's
th' sooart o' weather we mun expect at this time o' th' year.  It's a rare gooid job tha gate
them peats in, for we stand i' need ov a bit o' fire nah.  Does ta mean to sit up all th' neet
same as usual?

Eea, aw think ther's nowt like keep in up th' owd customs, an' we've niver missed watchin Kursmiss
in sin we wor wed, an' that'll be nearly forty year sin; weant it? Shift that canel, sithee'
ha it sweals! Does'nt to think tha'd better ligg summat to th' dooar bottom? Hark thi what
a wind!  Aw niver heeard th' likes; it maks th' winders fair gender agean.  Soa, soa; lend
me owd o' that pooaker, aw shall niver be able to taich thee ha to mend a fire aw do think.
Tha should never bray it in at th' top;--use it kindly mun, tha'll find it'll thrive better;
it's th' same wi' a fire as it is wi' a child--if you're allus brayin' at it you'll mak it
a sad un at th' last, an' niver get nowt but black luks. But its net mich use talkin' to thee
aw con see, for tha'rt ommost asleep; aw believe if th' thack ud to be blown off tha couldn't
keep thi e'en oppen after ten o'clock; but use is second natur ommost, an' aw feel rayther
sleepy mysen, aw allus do when ther's a wind."

      *         *         *         *         *         *         *

In two or three minutes they wor booath hard asleep, but they had't to sleep long, for ther
coom a knock at th' door laad enuff to wakken deeaf Debra (an shoo couldn't hear thunner).
Th' owd man started up an flew to oppen th' door, an' in stawped a walkin' snow-drift.

"Aw wish yo a merry Kursmiss," he said.

"Thank thi lad; come a bit nearer th' leet.  If tha's browt noa better luk nor tha's browt
weather, tha'd better ha stopped at hooam.  Who art ta?"

"Well, its a bonny come off," said th' chap, "when my own uncle connot own me."

"Its nooan Ezra, is it?" said th' owd woman.

"That's my name, aw believe, aunt," he said.

"Waw, do come an' sit thi daan.  Set that kettle on lad, and mak him a drop o' summat warm;
he'll do wi' it."

It worn't long afoor th' new comer wor sat i'th' front o'th' fire, smookin' a long pipe an'
weetin' his whistle ivery nah an then wi' a drop o' whiskey an' watter.

"Nah lad," said th' owd man, "what news has ta browt?  Tha's generally summut new."

"Aw've nowt mich uts likely to be fresh, aw dooant think," said Ezra. "Yo'd hear tell abaght
that do o' Slinger's aw reckon?"

"Niver a word, lad; what's th' chuffin heead been doin?"

"Well, aw'd better start at th' beginnin' o' my tale, an' as it's rayther a longish en, you
mun draw up to th' fire and mak up yor mind to harken a bit."

"Yo happen niver knew Molly Momooin?  Shoo lived at Coldedge, an' used to keep one o' them
sooart o' spots known i' thease pairts as a whist shop; yo'll know what that is?  Shoo worn't
a bad-like woman, considerin' her age (for shoo wor aboon fifty, an' had been a widdy for a
dozen year), an iver sin her felly deed, shoo'd sell'd small drink o'th sly (they dooant think
its wrang up i' them pairts), an ther wor at said it wor nooan of a bad sooart, tho shoo used
to booast at ther wor niver a chap gate druffen i' her haas, tho ther'd been one or two brussen.
Like monny a widdy beside, at's getten a bit o' brass together, shoo wor pestered wi' chaps
at wanted to hing ther hats up, an put ther feet o' th' hearthstooan, an' call thersen th'
maister o' what they'd niver helped to haddle.  But shoo wornt a waik-minded en, wornt Molly:--an
shoo tell'd em all at th' chap at gate her ud have to have a willin' hand as well as a warm
heart, for shoo'd enuff to do to keep hersen, withaat workin' her fingers to th' booan for
a lump o' lumber ith' nook.

Soa one after another they all left off botherin' her except one, an that wor Jim o' long Joan's,
throo Wadsworth, an he seemed detarmined to get her to change her mind if he could.  As sooin
as iver shoo oppened th' shuts in a mornin', he used to laumer in an' call for a quart (that
cost him three-awpence, an used to fit him varry weel woll nooin). Well, things nother seemed
to get farther nor nearer, for a long time, but one day summat happened at made a change ith'
matter.  It wor just abaght th' time at th' new police wor put on, an Slinger wor made into
one.  Nah Slinger thowt he ought to be made into a sargent, an he said "he wor determined to
extinguish hissen i' sich a way woll they couldn't be off promotionin' him, an if they didn't
he'd nobscond."  Soa th' furst thing he did wor to goa an ligg information agen owd Molly sellin'
ale baght license.  Th' excise chaps sooin had him an two or three moor off to cop th' owd
lass ith' act, for they said, "unless they could see it thersen they could mak nowt aght."
It wor a varry nice day, an' off they set o' ther eearand.

Nah it just soa happened at Jim o' long Joans (they used to call him Jimmy-long for short),
wor lukin' aght oth' winder, an' saw em comin'; ther wor noabody ith' haas drinkin' but hissen,
soa emptyin' his quart daan th' sink, he tell'd Molly to be aware, for ther wor mischief brewin';
an then he bob'd under th' seat. In abaght a minit three on em coom in,--not i' ther blue clooas
an silver buttons, but i' ther reglar warty duds.

"Nah, owd lass," said one, "let's have hauf-a-gallon o' stiff-shackle, an luk sharp."

"What do yo want, maister?  I think yo've come to th' rang haase; do yo tak this to be a jerry-hoil;
or ha?" said Molly.  (They'd ta'en care to leave Slinger aghtside, cos they knew he'd be owned.)

"Nay, nah come," they said, "its all reight mun, here's th' brass, sithee, fotch a soop up,
for we're all three as dry as a assmidden."

"Why, if yo are reight dry," shoo says (an bith' mass they wor, for they'd been walkin' a bit
o' ther best), "ther's lots o' watter ith' pot under th' table, but be as careful as yo con,
for it bides a deal o' fotchin'--but aw wodn't advise yo to fill yor bellies o' cold watter
when yo're sweatin', its nooan a gooid thing mun.  Have yo come fur?  Yo luk as if yo'd been
runnin' aght oth' gate o' summut, but aw hope yo've been i' noa sooart o' mischief: hasumever,
sit yo daan an cooil a bit."

They set em daan, for they wor fessened what to do, an at last one on em whispered, "aw believe
Slinger's been havin' us on, seekin' th' fiddle, but if he has, we'll repoort him an get him
discharged like a shot."

"Why," said another, "ha is it he isn't here?  Where's he gooan?"

"He's hid hissen ith' pigcoit just aghtside.  Aw expect he'll be ommost stoled o' waitin' bi
this, but let him wait, he desarves it for bringin' folk o' sich eearands as theease,  We'st
nobbut get laft at when we get back, soa what think yo if we goa an say nowt abaght it?  He'll
nooan stop long aw'll warrant."

"Well, nowt but reight," they said; soa biddin' th' owd woman gooid day, they set off back.
When they went aght,  Jimmy crope throo under th' langsettle, an' lukin' at Molly, he said,
"Nah, have aw done thi a gooid turn this time owd craytur?"

"Tha has, Jim, an aw'm varry mich obleeged to thi, lad," shoo says, "an tha shall have another
quart at my expense."

"Net yet, thank thi, Molly.  Aw havn't done wi this--ther's a bit ov a spree to be had aght
on it yet mun, aw heeard ivery word at they said, an what does ta think!  They've left Slinger
ith' pigcoit waitin', an aw meean to keep him theear for a bit."  Soa sayin,' he quietly crept
aght, an went raand to th' back o' th' pigcoit.

"Slinger! are ta thear?"

"All reight, lad; have yo fun ought?"

"Nut yet, but we're just gooin to do; tha munnat stir, whativer tha does. Its a rare do is
this. It'll be th' makin' on us, mun."

"Does ta think we shall get made into sargents?" axed Slinger.

"I lad, an corporals too, aw'll be bun; but bowd thi whisht, whatever tha does--we'll come
for thi as sooin as we want thi; does ta think tha could sup a drop o' summat if tha had it?"

"Aw wish aw'd chonce, that's all.'"

"Well, bide thi time, an aw'll send thi some."

Jim then walked away, an leavin' Slinger screwed up like a dishclaat, he went into th' haase,
and call'd for a quart.

"Well, what's come o' Slinger?" said Molly.

"Oh, he's all reight--he's gooin through his degrees to get made into a sargent or a corporal
or some other sort ov a ral, but aw'll bet he'll wish it wor his funeral afoor aw've done wi' him."

Jimmy sat comfortably suppin' his stiffshackle an smokin' a bit o' bacca, an tried by all th'
means in his power to wheedle th' owd woman into his way o' thinkin'.

"Tha mud do wor nor ha' me mun" he said, "aw'm nut ovver handsome aw know, but ther's nowt
abaght me to flay onybody."

"Ther'll nubby be freetened o' thee lad, tha need'nt think," shoo says, "for tha reminds me
ov a walkin' cloaas peg--if tha'd been split a bit heigher up tha'd ha' done for a pair o'
cart shafts."

"Well tha knows beauty's i'th eye o'th beholder," says Jim.

"They'd be able to put all thy beauty i' ther e'e an see noa war for it," shoo says.

"Well, aw'm willin' to work an keep thi a lady as far as th' brass 'll gaa."

"What mack ov a lady aw should like to know?  Th' same as aw am nah aw reckon, up to th' elbows
i' soap suds.  But once for all aw want thi to understand at aw'm nooan i'th weddin' vein at
present."

"Well tha'rt a hard-hearted woman, that's what tha art--an nooan as gooid ith' bottom as tha
mud be, or else tha'd niver live here chaitin' th' excise for a livin', astead o' being th'
wife ov a daycent chap.  Aw ommost wish aw'd letten them chaps catch thi; it ud nobbut ha sarved
thi reight."

"Sarved me reight, wod it?  Well tha con goa an fotch Slinger aght o' th' pigcoit (for aw reckon
he's thear yet), but ha mich better ar ta, at sits thear suppin' it?  But whether aw'm as gooid
as aw should be or net, aw'm sure tha'rt a gooid-for-nowt, an th' sooiner tha taks thi hook
aght o' this haase an' th' better, for aw've studden thy nonsense woll aw'm fair staled. Are
ta baan?  For if tha doesn't tha'll get this poaker abaght thi heead."

"Nay! Nay! tha doesn't mean it?" said Jim, jumpin' aght o'th gate, "tha wodn't hurt me surelee?"

"Hurt thi! drabbit thi up, tha's spun me to th' length--ger aght o' that door."

Jimmy kept backin' aght step by step, an' Molly wor flourishin' th' poaker, but nother on em
saw at th' peggy-tub wor fair i'th gate woll Jim backed slap into it.  Splash went th' watter
o' ivery side, an' Molly skriked, "A'a dear! sarved thi reight, as if tha could'nt see a whole
tub!  What are ta splashin' like that for?"

But poor Jimmy couldn't spaik, for he wor wedged as fast as a thief in a miln, an' nowt but
his legs an' his arms could be seen. Molly catched howd on his legs an' tried to pool him aght,
but th' heigher shoo lifted his feet an' th' lower sank his heead, soa ther wor noa way to
do but to roll it over an' teem him aght.

"This beats all," says Molly, as shoo helped him up, "couldn't ta see it?"

"Does ta think aw've a e'e i' th' back o' my heead?" he said, "it's all long o' thee, an' dang
it that watters whoot."

"It's like to be whoot," shoo says, "did ta iver know folk wesh i' cold watter, tha lumphead?"

"Well, what shall aw have to do? Aw'm as weet as a sop, to say nowt ov a blister or two.

"Tha mun goa thi ways to bed an' throw thi clooas daan th' stairs an, aw'll see if aw connot
dry 'em off for thi."

Soa up stairs he went an' flang his weet things daan, sayin' at th' same time, "If tha finds
any buttons off tha can suit thisen whether tha puts 'em on or net."

"Aw've summat else to do nor sew for thee, tha's made we wark enuff," shoo said.

It did'nt tak long for Molly to dry th' cloas an' shoo raylee felt sooary for him after all,
soa shoo set too an' stitched him a button or two on, an' as shoo said, "mensened him up a
bit for he wor somebody's poor lad."

He wor sooin drest nice an' comfortable agean an' then he thowt it wor time to goa an' see
what had come o' Slinger.

As sooin as he coom near th' coit he could hear him snoaring away ommost as laad as a trombone.
"Well tha'rt a bonny en" he said "to be paid aght o'th rates for keeping a sharp luk aght.
Aw did think to bring thi summat to sup but its a pity to disturb thi.  Aw'll try another dodge
an see ha' that'll act."

Away he went an' in a minit or two coom back wi a huggin o' strea, an' quietly oppenin th'
door he shoved it in,--he then walked off mutterin "tha'll be capp'd when tha wackens owd lad."

As th' day began to grow shorter a few owd faces began to peep in to see ha Molly wor gettin
on an' to taste ov her drink.  When ther'd getten abaght a hauf a duzzen on em Jim slipped
aght an' sammed up all he could find i'th' shape o' buckets an' had em filled wi watter an'
not o' th' cleanest sooart,--then he lit a wisp o' strea just aghtside o'th' pighoil door an'
waited wall th' smook had begun to curl nicely up:-- then he darted into th' haase an' bawled
aght "Heigh lads! do come,-- somdy's set th' pighoil o' fire."

Aght they flew an' sure enuff thear it wor reekin away' like a brick kiln.

"Sleck th' inside first," says Jim, an' in a twinklin one pailful after another wor splashed
in.  Slinger sooin wacken'd but he wor fast what to mak on it,--he thowt he must be dreamin
ov a storm at sea or summat.

"Howd on! Howd on!" he yell'd aght "what have yo agate?"

"Do luk sharp lads," says Jim, "ther's somdy inside they'll be burnt to th' deeath.  Bring
some watter some on yo."

"Ther is noan," they says, "its all done."

"Why mucky watter 'll sleck as weel as clean, give us howd of a pailful o' swill.  We munnot
have th' poor body burnt to th' deeath."

Just as Slinger was rushin aght o'th' door he gate a reglar dooas 'at ommost floor'd him.

"Nah lads, lets stop a bit, says Jim, aw think th' dangers ommost ovver,--lets see who this
chap is.  It's happen somdy at wanted to burn owd Molly aght o' haase an' harbor."

Slinger brast aght o'th' door like a roarin lion,--but he wor sooin collard, an' he wor soa
bedisend with soft cake an' puttaty pillins at his own mother could'nt ha owned him.

"Dooant yo know who aw am," he sputtered aght, "Awm Slinger, yo know me."

"Bith mass it is Slinger," said Jim,--"its noabdy else," whativer has ta been dooin to get
into a mess like this?  Tha may thank thy stars tha worn't burnt to th' deeath."

"Well aw dooant know 'at it means mich whether a chap's burnt or draand, but awther on 'em
befoor being smoord,--did iver ony body see sich a seet as aw am?"

"Why tha luks like a sheep heead wi brain sauce tem'd over it, said one."

"He needn't carry a scent bottle wi' him, they'll be able to smell him withaat," said another.

"Ha shall aw have to get clean," says Slinger. "Aw can't goa hooam this pictur?"

"Tha'll have to get sombdy to scrape thi daan, unless tha thinks tha's getten enuff o'th' scrape
tha'rt in already;--but aw think tha'd better goa hooam to th' wife an' tell her tha's comed."

"He's noa need to do that, if shoo's ought of a nooas sho'll find it aght.

"Well if this is what comes o' being a bobby aw'll drop it, but for gooidness sake lads, niver
split for aw'st niver hear th' last o' this do."

At last they persuaded Slinger to goa hooam.  What he said to th' wife or what shoo said to
him folk niver knew, but certain it is 'at shoo went an' left him an' lived wi her mother for
aboon a wick at after.

When he turned aght next mornin to goa see th' superintendent, he luked like a gate-post 'at's
studden in a rookery for six months.  He'd to wait a bit afoor he could see him, but when he
did he said "Maister!" aw've comed to get turned off for awm sick o' this job--no moor cunstublin
for me, aw've had enuff."

"Why my good man," he said, "what's up? Have yo dropt in for summat yo dooant like?"

"Aw have,--an' summat's been dropt onto me at aw dooant like, an aw've made up my mind to throw
up th' drumsticks an' tak to honest hard wark for a livin."

"Well young man, yo seem dissatisfied, but yo should remember 'at we're like soldiers in a
war, we're feightin agean things 'at isn't reight, its nut allus straight forrard, it seems
yors has'nt been this time, but its one o'th chances o' war' at yo mun expect."

"It may be a chance o' war, but it'll be a chance o' better afoor yo catch me at it agean,
so gooid mornin."

When he'd getten into th' street he langed to goa up to owd Molly's agean, but thowts o'th'
neet afoor kept him back, and varry weel it wor soa, for Jim o' Long wor dooin his best to
flay th' owd woman woll shoo'd be glad to have him and shut up th' wisht shop,--an' be shot
he managed, for shoo promised shoo'd wed him in a month, an' shoo wor as gooid as her word.

Jimmy settled daan to his cobblin (for he reckoned to do a bit at that when he did ought),
an' he worked away varry weel for a bit, an' Molly took a pride i'th' garden aghtside an' th'
haase inside, an' they were varry comfortable. But ther wor just an odd booan somewhear abaght
Jim 'at did'nt like wark, an' aw think it must 'ha' been a wopper, for it used to stop all
t'other ivery nah and then for two or three days together.  He liked to goa an' sit i'th' beershop
opposite, an' have a pint or two, an' Molly knew it wor her bit o' brass at wor gooin, for
shoo said "he hardly haddled as mich sometimes as he cost i' wax."

One day he'd been rayther longer nor usual, an' shoo wor just ready for him.

"Aw thowt tha used to tell me at it wornt th' ale tha wanted, it wor me; but na it is'nt me
ta wants, it's the ale."

"Why, woll a chap lives he con alter his mind, connot he?" said Jim.

"Oh! soa tha's altered thi mind, has ta? Tha's noa need to tell me that, aw can see it, an'
aw've altered mine too, an' aw've a gooid mind to pail my heead agean th' jawm when aw think
on it."

"Why, lass, it's a pity to spoil a gooid mind, but aw'st advise thi to tak thi cap off for
fear o' crushin it."

"An' if aw did crush it, whose brass wor it at bought it, aw should like to know? Tha's taen
moor brass across th' rooad this wick nor what ud ha bought booath a cap an a bonnet, an' tha'rt
staring across nah as if tha langed to be gooin agean.  What are ta starin at?"

"Nay nowt, but aw think ther's a mule i'th' garden," said Jim.

"He'd hardly getten th' words aght ov his maath, when Molly seizes th' besom, an' flies aght,
saying, "It's just what yo mun expect when folk come hooam hauf druffen, an' leeav th' gate oppen."

"Whativer has th' owd craytur up," says Jim. "Shoo surely doesn't think aw mean ther wor a
mule i'th' garden?  Aw nobbut meant ther wor a bit ov a row i'th' hoil; but aw'll niver be
trusted if shoo is'nt lukkin under th' rhubub leaves, as if shoo thowt a mule could get thear,
but shoo'll be war mad at ther isn't one nor what shoo wod ha been if shoo'd fun hauf a duzzen."

Molly coom back in a awful temper. "Soa tha thowt tha couldn't do enuff to aggravate me but
tha mun mak a fooil on me?"

"Why, wornt ther one?"

"Noa, ther worn't, an' tha knew that."

"Ther wor summat 'at luk'd as faal as one, daatless, when tha wor thear."

"Come, tha's noa room to talk.  Aw think aw'm as handsom as thee, ony end up.  Folk may weel
wonder what aw could see i' thee, and aw niver should ha had thee if aw had'nt been varry cloise
seeted."

"Tha'rt booath cloise seeted and cloise fisted, aw think, and if tha wor cloiser maathed sometimes
ther'd be less din."

"Thear tha goaas agean.  Aw've spakken, have aw.  Aw'll tell thi what it is, tha can't bide
to be tell'd o' thi faults, but aw'm nooan gooin to be muzzled to suit thee."

"Why, lass, it isn't oft tha oppens thi maath for nowt, tha generally lets summat aght."

"Well, an' when tha oppens thine, tha generally lets summat in, soa we're abaght straight."

"Aw wish we wor, lass, for aw'm stoled o' this bother, an' if ther isn't a mule i'th' garden
nah, ther's summat else, for if that isn't Slinger, aw wor niver soa capt i' my life.  Why,
he looks as fat as a pig.  Oppen th' door, an' ax him in, for it's th' first time aw've seen
him sin he'd his heead in a pooltice."

"Gooid day, Slinger; ha ta gettin on?"

"Oh, meeterly just.  Aw thowt a callin when aw went past afoor, but ther wor sich a din, aw
thowt ther mud be a mule i' th'"--

"What does ta say," says Molly. "Has ta come here to taunt me?  "Aw've been tell'd abaght that
mule afoor this afternooin."

"Molly," said Jim, "tha caps me. Doesn't ta know what folk mean when they say there's a mule
i' th' garden?  They mean there's a bit of a dust i' th' hoil, that's all mun."

"Oh! is that it!" says Molly. "Aw see nah.  Yo know aw'm to be excused if aw dooant understand
iverything, for aw'm not mich of a scholard; ther worn't schooils like there is nah when aw
wor a lass; but aw'd a brother once 'at wor as cliver as onybody--he used to be able to rule
th' planets; but he wor draaned at last, an' aw declare aw've niver been able to bide th' seet
o' watter sin'.  Aw believe that wor what made me start o' brewin."

"Why yo happen have a sup left, said Slinger?"

"Ea lad, ther's some i' that pewter sithee--tak howd an sup."

"Thank thi' "he said, an' here's wishing at ther may niver be a 'mule i' th' garden' but what
'll be as easy getten shut on as this has been this afternooin."

"Gooid lad Slinger!  Tha talks like a book.  Aw believe if tha'd had a better bringin up tha'd
ha' made a philosipher says Molly."

"Tha had a fancy once to be a police ossifer hadn't ta said Jim?  But aw think tha's getten
that nooation purged aght on thi nah?"

"Well, aw gate it swill'd aght on me ony way.  But aw think some times' at it towt me a bit
o' sense, an' whoiver he is 'at wants to raise hissen up, by poolin somdy else daan, aw hope
he'll get sarved ith' same way; for when a chap shuts his een to ivery body's interests but
his own he desarves to be dropt on--but if we'd all to strive to lend one another a hand, things
ud go on a deal smoother, an' as nooan on us is perfect, we ought to try by kindness an' gooid
natur an by practisin a bit o' patience to mak one another's rooad as pleasant as we con, an
if we stuck to that we should find fewer mules i' th' garden."

      *         *         *         *         *         *         *

"O! an' soa that's th' tale abaght Slinger, is it Ezra?"

"That's it uncle, its done nah."

"Its abaght time it wor, an' th' next time tha comes here an' brings a tale wi' thi mak it
hauf as long an' it'll be twice as welcome."

A Neet at "Widup's Rest."

We've mooast on us, at one 'time or another, accidentally dropt amang company withaat havin
ony idea o' spendin mich time wi' em, an' yet we've kept stoppin an' stoppin, feelin as happy
as con be, an' niver thinkin for a minit what a blowin-up we should get when we landed hooam.
An' aw've mony a time thowt 'at a body enjoys a bit ov a doo o' that sooart a deal better nor
a grand set affair, becoss when a body expects nowt it's hardly likely he'll be disappointed.
Well, it wor one day last winter 'at aw'd walked monny a weary mile, an' it wor commin dark,
when aw called at "Widdup's Rest," to see if aw could get owt to comfort me old inside, for
aw wor feelin varry wamley. As sooin as th' lonlady saw me shoo ax'd me to step forrads into
another raam, which aw did, an' fan a few chaps set raand a fire fit to rooast a bull, an'
lukkin varry jolly. As sooin as they saw me they made raam for me at th' hob end, an' began
talkin to me as friendly as if they'd known me all ther life. Aw sooin began to feel varry
mich at hooam wi' em, an' as th' lonlady browt in some basins o' hot stew 'at shoo wodn't be
paid for, (an old trick to get fowk to spend twice as mich another rooad) an' as another chap
wod pay for all we had to sup an' smook, aw thowt aw mud ha gone farther an' fared worse. It
worn't long befoor some moor coom droppin in (ha that happens aw dooant know, but aw darsay
you'll ha nooaticed it monny a time yorsen, 'at if ther's owt stirrin 'at's cheap ther's allus
a certain class o' fowk 'at drop in accidentally).

After a bit, we mustered a varry nice pairty ov abaat a dozen, an' as iverybody wor tawkin
at once we managed to mak a fairish din. But at last one o'th' chaps proposed 'at we should
have a cheerman, an' see if we couldn't conduct business in a moor sensible manner. Ivery body
sed, "hear, hear!" an' ov cooarse th' chap 'at wor standin sam wor voated in, which seemed
to give him mich satisfaction, an aw couldn't help thinking 'at he worn't th' furst chap 'at
had getten put i' sich a position for his brass an' net his brains.

After "order" had been called two or three times bi every body i'th' place, th' cheerman stood
up an' sed, "Gentlemen, aw feel varry praad to okkipy this cheer, an' aw'll do mi best to discharge
the duties that disolves upon me at this important crikus, an' aw think if ony body wants to
order owt they'd better do it at once, soas we shalln't have ony interruptions." We all shaated,
"hear, hear!" agean, an' th' lonlady wor i'th' raam befoor we'd time to ring th' bell. When
we'd all getten supplied th' cheerman stood up agean, an' knockin th' table wi' a empty ale
bottle, sed, "silence!"

We ivery one shaated "silence!" an' luk'd daggers at one another for makkin sich a din, an'
then he went on to say, "Gentlemen, as aw'm a stranger amang yo, ov coorse aw dooant know mich
abaat yo, but aw should be varry mich pleeased if one on yo wod oblige bi singing a song."

"Nah ther's a chonce for thee, Cocky," sed one.

"Tha knows aw connot sing," sed Cocky, "aw think Ike ud do better nor me."

"Nay, aw can sing nooan," sed Ike, "aw niver sang owt i' mi life but' Rock-a-boo-babby,' an'
it's soa long sin aw've forgetten that, but ther's old Mosslump thear, happen he'll give us
one, we all know he can sing." "Dooant thee pitch onto me," sed Mosslump, "it'll be time enuf
for thee to start o' orderin when we mak thi into th' cheerman, what can't yo start wi' Standhen
for, we know he can sing?"

"O, Standhen!" they sed, "we'd forgetten Standhen! He can give us a owd Tory touch we know."

Up jumpt th' cheerman, an befoor Standhen had time to spaik he called aght, "Mr. Standhen!
We're all waitin for thy song, an as cheerman o' this assembly aw expect thee to do what tha
con to entertain this compny, or otherwise aw shall vacate this cheer."

As all th' glasses wor beginnin to get low, they felt this to be an appeal to ther inmost sowl,
soa they all began, perswadin Standhen, an' after a deeal to do he promised to try. "Aw know
awst braik daan befoor aw start," he sed. "Nay, tha'll have to start furst," sed one, "but
we'll excuse thi if tha does; if tha tries it'll show willin." After coughin once an' suppin
twice, he shut his e'en an' oppened his maath, an' this is what coom aght:--

   Thou grand old Church of England!
      Though others raise their voice,
   And try to stain thy spotless name,
      Thou still shall be my choice;
   Just as thou art, I love thee thus,
      And freely I confess,
   I'd have thee not one jot the more,
      Nor yet one tittle less.

   Those who would rob thee of thy rights,
      And urge with specious tongue,
   That theft by Act of Parliament
      Can surely not be wrong.
   I'd have them leave thy sheltering wing,
      And nevermore to dare
   To stand within thy courts of praise,
      Or taint thy house of prayer.

   Oh! dear old Church of England,
      That points the way to Heaven!
   Amid a sad, sad world of sin
      The truly, only leaven.
   We leave thee to our Father's care,
      Who knows thy needs the best,
   Convinced that He, by aid of thee,
      Will leaven all the rest.

When he'd finished they all knocked ther glasses on th' table bi way ov applaudin, which th'
lonlady hearin, at once coom in an' ax'd if they wor "callin?" an' as all wor empty, shoo luk'd
varry hard at th' cheerman, an' he nodded "as befoor," soa shoo gethered up th' empties, an'
called for Liza "to bring in them glasses," which wor at once done, an' showd a gooid deal
o' foreseet on her part i' havin 'em ready.

When all had getten sarved wi' hot watter, an' given ovver crushin sugar, th' cheerman announced
'at it wor Mr. Standhen's call, soa up jumped Standhen, an' said "he couldn't do better nor
call owd Mosslump for a song." Some moor applause followed this, but they didn't knock th'
tables wi' ther glasses this time, becoss they wor too full.

Long befoor he'd done th' chaps had begun tawkin, some abaat politics an some abaat Knursticks,
an' when he sat daan th' cheerman wor th' only quiet chap i' th' lot, an' he wor ommost asleep;
but Mosslump comforted hissen wi' whisperin to me 'at classical mewsic wor varry little thowt
on, an' after a sigh, a sup, a shake ov his head, an' another leet for his pipe, he sat daan
evidently detarmined not to be suited wi' owt i' th' singin way that neet. After th' cheerman
had wakken'd up, two or three called for "Cocky," an' this time he gate up withaat ony excuses,
an' although he did rock backards an' forrads like a clock pendlum th' wrang end up, yet aw
must say he entered life an' soul into what he had to do, an' in a voice 'at seemed three times
too big for the size ov his carcass he sang--

   Lord John and John Lord were both born on a day,
      But their fortunes were different quite;
   Lord John was decked out in most gorgeous array,
      As soon as he first saw the light.
   But poor Johnny Lord, it's true on my word,
      He'd no clothes to step into at all;
   He'd no flannel to wrap, he'd no nightgown or cap,
      But was rolled in his poor mother's shawl.
         Now, it seems very strange, yet it's true what I say
            And I hope you're not doubting my word;
         And I'll tell what took place in a general way,
            With Lord John and with poor Johnny Lord

   The nurse took Lord John, and the doctors stood round,
      And examined the child and his clothes;
   Whilst a fussy physician, with looks most profound,
      Wiped his aristocratical nose.
   "It is, I declare, most uncommonly fair,
      And its voice, oh! how sweet when it cries;
   It really would seem like the child of a dream,
      Or an angel just dropt from the skies."
         Now, it seems very strange, &c.

   Now, poor Johnny Lord and his mother were laid,
     Both fainting and cold on the straw;
   No doctors would come there unless they were paid,
      Or compelled to be there by the law.
   No comforting word heard poor Mistress Lord,
      As o'er her babe bending she sat,
   And each one who saw it cried with one accord,
      "What a little detestable brat."
         Now, it seems very strange, &c.

   The two babes became men as the years rolled away.
      And Lord John sported carriage and pair,
   Whilst poor Johnny Lord working hard for poor pay,
      Was content with what fell to his share.
   Lord John went to races, to balls and to routs,
      And squandered his wealth with the gay,
   Till at last came the reaper, and sought them both out,
      And took Lord John and John Lord away.
         Now, it seems very strange, &c.

   Very soon a grand monument stood o'er Lord John,
      To show where the great man was laid,
   But over John Lord was no mark and no stone,
      It was left as when left by the spade.
   But the time yet shall come when John Lord and Lord John
      Shall meet in the realms far away,
   When the riches and titles of earth are all gone,
      Then which will be greatest, friends, say?
         Then, though it seems strange, yet it's true what you've heard,
             And a lesson throughout it is cast,
      Which should comfort the poor working men like John Lord,
         For we all shall be equal at last.

As sooin as he'd finished quaverin on th' last noat but one, ther wor sich a knockin o' glasses
an' thump in o' fists, wol th' lonlady coom in agean, an' th' cheerman felt it his duty to
order "as befoor," which order th' lonlady worn't long i' executin. "Gooid lad! Cocky!" sed
Ike, "if aw'd a voice like thee aw'd travel! Tawk abaat Sims Reeves! He niver sang a song like
that sin he wor creddled! Nah Maister Cheerman, keep up th' harmony, we're mendin on it aw'm
sure. 'Gow, aw'll have another pipe o' bacca o' th' heead on it' nay, raylee, aw niver did
hear sich a song," savin which he sat daan an' hid his astonishment behund a claad o' reek.

"Well," sed th' cheerman, "as Ike seems soa anxious, aw think he'd better try an' let's see
what he con do." "Hear, hear!" on all sides, an' two or three pulled him up whether he wod
or net, an' after a gooid deal o' sidelin abaat, he axed if he mud have his cap on, for he
could niver sing withaat cap. "That's to keep th' mewsic throo flyin aght o'th' top ov his
heead," sed one. "Order!" sed th' cheerman, "if Ike wants his cap on let him have it, may be
he'll loise th' air withaat it."

Ike luk'd very solid for a minit, an' then he struck a lively tune in a voice abaat as musical
as a saw sharpener.

   When shoo ax'd me yesterneet
   What made mi heart so leet,
   Aw says, "why can't ta see it's
      'Coss mi love's come back."
   Then aw gave her just a kiss,
   An' shoo tuk it noan amiss
   An' aw'm feear'd aw'st brust wi' bliss,
      For mi love's come back.
   O, aw niver thowt befoor
   'At sich joy could be i' stoor,
   But nah aw'l grieve noa moor,
      For mi love's come back.

As mud ha been expected, they applauded Ike famously, but th' cheerman wor hard asleep agean,
an' it tuk a gooid shakkin to wakken him, an' then he didn't seem to be altogether thear, an'
as sooin as they left him aloan he dropt on agean.

"Aw think th' cheerman's ommost sewed up," sed Ike. "Net he! he's noan sewed up," sed Mosslump,
"it's that song o' thine 'at's sent him to sleep! who the shames does ta think could keep wakken
for sich a song as that? aw knew tha'd do it as sooin as aw heeard thi begin." "Come, aw'll
sing thee for a quairt any day," sed Ike, "tha fancies coss tha'd once a uncle 'at could sing
a bit, 'at ther's some mewsic born i' thee; but if aw'd a public haase aw wodn't let thee sing
in it for a paand, for aw'll bet tha'd turn all th' ale saar." "Tha am't worth tawkin to, Ike,
an' as for thee havin a voice, Why! tha arn't fit to hawk cockles an' mussels." "Well, an if
aw did hawk 'em aw'd tak gooid care aw didn't sell thee ony unless aw gate th' brass befoorhand,
soa tha can crack that nut." "Does ta mean to say 'at aw dooant pay mi way? aw've moor brass
commin in ivery day nor tha can addle in a wick." Aw saw it luk'd likely for a row brewin,
soa aw sed, "nah chaps, we've had a verry nice evening soa far, an' aw shouldn't like ony unpleasantness,
for yo see th' cheerman's had a drop too much, an' aw think we owt to try to get him hooam
if ony body knows wheear he lives." "Eea!" sed one chap 'at had been varry quite all th' neet,
"aw dooant think he'll pay for owt ony moor, soa we mud as weel get shut on him." "Ther's Frank
standin' at th' corner," sed another "aw dar say he'll tak him." "Who's Frank, aw asked." "And
bring suspicion upon us both? No," said Edwy, "one will be enough to report ill at once; Dunstan
is an old fox."

Poor Elfric could hardly get to bed, and, almost for the first time since infancy, he laid himself
down without one prayer. Edwy left him in the dark, and there he lay, his head throbbing, and
a burning thirst seeming to consume him.

Long before morning he was very sick, and when the bell was sounded for the early mass it need
hardly be said that he was unable to rise.

Sigebert the physician, who, like Redwald, was in the confidence of the future king, Edwy,
came in to see him, and asked what was the matter.

"I am very sick and ill," gasped Elfric.

"I suppose you have taken something that disagreed with you--too much fish perhaps." (with a
smile).

"No--no--I do not--"

"I understand," said the leech; "you will soon be better; meanwhile, I will account for your
absence at chapel. Here, take this medicine; you will find it relieve you."

And he gave Elfric a mixture which assuaged his burning thirst, and bathed his forehead with
some powerful essence which refreshed him greatly, whereupon the leech departed.

Only an hour later, and Edred, hearing from the physician of Elfric's sudden illness, came in
to see the boy, whose bright cheerful face and merry disposition had greatly attracted him. This
was hardest of all for Elfric to bear; he had to evade the kind questions of the king, and to
hear expressions of sympathy which he felt he did not deserve.

More than once he felt inclined to tell all, but the fear of the prince restrained him, and
also a sense of what he thought honour, for he would not betray his companion, and he could
not confess his own guilt without implicating Edwy.

Poor boy! it would have been far better for him had he done so: he had taken his first step downward.

CHAPTER
VI. LOWER AND LOWER.

It becomes our painful duty to record that from the date of the feast,
described in our last chapter, the character of poor Elfric underwent
rapid deterioration.

In the first place, the fact of his having yielded to the forbidden indulgence, and--as he felt--disgraced
himself, gave Edwy, as the master of the secret, great power over
him, and he never failed to use this power whenever he saw any inclination
on the part of his vassal to throw off the servitude.

It was not that he deliberately intended to injure Elfric, but he
had come to regard virtue as either weakness or hypocrisy, at least
such virtues as temperance, purity, or self restraint.

The great change which was creeping over Elfric became visible to others: he seemed to lose his
bright smile; the look of boyish innocence faded from his countenance, and gave place to an expression
of sullen reserve; he showed less ardour in all his sports and pastimes,
became subject to fits of melancholy, and often seemed lost in thought,
anxious thought, in the midst of his studies.

He seldom had the power, even if the will, to communicate with home.

Mercia was in many respects an independent state, subject to the same king, but governed by a
code of laws differing from those of Wessex; and it was only when a royal messenger or some
chance traveller left court for the banks of the Midland Avon, that
Elfric could use the art of writing, a knowledge he was singular in
possessing, thanks to the wisdom of his sire.

So the home authorities knew little of the absent one, for whom they
offered up many a fervent prayer, and of whom they constantly spoke
and thought.

And yet, so mysterious are the ways of Providence, it seemed as if
these prayers were unanswered--seemed indeed, yet they were not forgotten
before God.

Seemed forgotten; for Elfric was rapidly becoming reckless.

Many subsequent scenes of indulgence had followed the first one, and other haunts, residences
of licentious young nobles, or taverns, had been sought out by the youths, and always by Redwald's
connivance.

He was Edwy's evil genius, and always seemed at hand whensoever the
prince sought occasion to sin.

Still, he was not at all suspected by Edred, before whom he kept up an appearance of the strictest
morality-- always punctual in his attendance at mass, matins, and
evensong, and with a various stock of phrases of pious import ready
at tongue in case of need or opportunity of using them to advantage.

To Elfric, his behaviour was always reserved, yet he seemed even more ready to lend him a helping hand
downward than did the prince.

So time passed on; weeks became months; and Christmas with all its hallowed associations had
passed; it had been Elfric's first Christmas away from home, and
he was sad at heart, in spite of the boisterous merriment of his companions.

The spring of the year 955 came on, and Lent drew near, a season to
which Edwy looked forward with great dread, for, as he said, there
would be nothing in the whole palace to eat until Easter, and he could
not even hope to bribe the cook.

The canons of the church required all persons to make confession, and so enter upon the fast
tide, having "thus purified their minds;"

[x] it may, alas! be easily guessed how the guilty lads performed this duty, how enforced
confession only led to their adding the sin of further deceit, and that of a deadly kind.

Thus they entered upon Lent: their abstinence was entirely compulsory,
not voluntary; and although they made up for it in some degree when
they could get away from the palace, yet even this was difficult,
for it was positively unlawful for butchers to sell or for people
to buy meat at the prohibited seasons, and the law was not easily
evaded.

But it was a prayerless Lent also to Elfric, for he had, alas! even discontinued his habit
of daily prayer, a habit he had hitherto maintained from childhood,
a habit first learned at his mother's knee.

Holy Week came, and was spent with great strictness; the king seemed
to divide his whole time between the business of state and the duties
of religion.

Dunstan was absent at Glastonbury, but other ecclesiastics thronged the palace, and there were
few, save the guilty boys and Redwald, who seemed uninfluenced by
the solemn commemoration.

But it must not be supposed that Elfric was wholly uninfluenced: after the preaching of the
Passion by a poor simple monk on Good Friday, he retired to his own
little room, where he wept as if his heart would break.

Had Dunstan been then in town, the whole story would have been told, and much misery saved,
for Elfric felt he could trust him if he could trust anybody; but unhappily Dunstan was, as
we have seen, keeping Passiontide at his abbey.

Still, Elfric felt he must tell all, and submit to the advice and
penance which might be imposed; and as he sat weeping over his sin
that Good Friday night, with the thought that he might find pardon
and peace through the Great Sacrifice so touchingly pleaded that day,
he felt that the first step to amendment must lie in a full and frank
confession of all; he knew he should grievously offend Edwy, and that
he should lose the favour of his future king, but he could not help
it.

"Why, oh why did I leave Aescendune, dear Aescendune?--fool that I was --I will go back."

And a sweet desire of home and kindred rose up before him--of his father's loving welcome, his
fond mother's chaste kiss, and of the dear old woods and waters--the hallowed associations of
his home life. He rose up to seek Father Benedict, determined to enter upon the path of peace
at any cost, when Edwy entered.

He did not see in the gathering darkness the traces of emotion visible on poor Elfric's countenance,
and he began in his usual careless way-- "How are you, Elfric, my boy; glad Lent is nearly over?
What a dismal time that wretched monk preached this morning!"

"Edwy, I am utterly miserable: I must tell all; I cannot live like this any longer."

"What a burst of penitence! go to confession; to be sure it looks well, and if one can only
manage to get out a few tears they account him a saint; tell me the receipt."

"But, Edwy, I must tell all!"

"Not if you are wise."

"Why not? It is all in secrecy."

"No it is not; you will be required as a penance to go and tell the
king all that we have done; you may do so, and I will manage to represent
matters so as to throw the whole blame on you; you will be sent home
in disgrace."

Poor Elfric hung down his head; the thought of his disgrace reaching
home had not occurred to him.

"Come," said Edwy, "I don't want to be hard upon you. Cheer up, my man. What have you done amiss?
Only enjoyed yourself as nature has guided you.

Why should you think God meant us to pass through life like those
miserable shavelings Edred delights to honour?

Cheer up, Elfric; your bright face was never meant for that of a
hypocrite.

If you are so dreadfully bad, you are in a pretty numerous company; and I don't think the shavelings
believe their own tales about fire and torment hereafter.

They are merry enough, considering."

In short, poor Elfric's short-lived penitence was given to the winds. Edwy went alone to be shriven
on the morrow.

On Easter Day they both received the Holy Communion in the royal chapel.

From

that time remorse ceased to visit the heir of Aescendune, as if he had at last quenched the Spirit,
and he became so utterly wild and reckless, that at last Dunstan thought it necessary to speak
to him privately on the subject. It was nearly six months after Easter.

The boy entered the study set apart for the use of the great monk and statesman with a palpitating
heart, but he managed to repress its beatings, and put on a perfectly
unconcerned expression of countenance.

He had gained in self control if in nothing else.

"I wished to speak with you, Elfric," said the abbot, "upon a very serious matter. When you first
came here, I was delighted to have you as a companion to the prince. You were evidently well
brought up, and bore an excellent character; but, I grieve to say, you have greatly changed
for the worse. Are you not aware of it?"

"No, father. What have I done?"

Dunstan sighed at the tone of the reply, and continued--"It is not any particular action of which
I wish to accuse you, but of the general tenor of your conduct. I do not speak harshly, my boy; but
if truth be told, you are as idle as you were once diligent, as sullen and reserved as once
candid and open: and, my son, your face tells a tale of even worse things, and, but that I
am puzzled to know where you could obtain the means of self indulgence, I should attribute more
serious vices to you."

"Who has accused me, father?"

"Yourself--that is, your own face and manner. Did you ever contemplate yourself in a mirror when
at home? There is a steel one against that wall, go and look at yourself now."

Elfric blushed deeply.

"My face is still the same," he said.

"It is the same, and yet not the same. Innocence once took her place at its portals, and had
sealed it as her own; the expression is all changed; my boy, I am absolutely certain that all
is not well with you. For your own sake, delay no longer to avoid the danger of losing your
salvation, for the habits you form now will perhaps cling to you through life. Turn now to
your own self; confess your sin, and be at peace."

"I came to confession at Shrovetide; I am not required to come now, am I?"

"Required?

No, my boy, it is your own sense of guilt, alone, which should draw you. The Church, since
there has been no public scandal, leaves you to your own judgment at such a time as this. Have
you never felt such remorse of conscience as would tell you your duty?"

"Never."

He thought of Good Friday, and blushed.

"Your tone and words belie each other, my boy. God grant you repentance; you will not accept my
help now, but the time may come when you will seek help in vain."

Elfric bowed, without reply, and at a sign left the chamber.

A few weeks later, at the beginning of November, Edred left London for a tour in the west,
and quitted his nephews with more than his usual affection, although his goodbye to Elfric was
more constrained, for the good old king, not knowing the whole truth, was beginning to fear that
Elfric was a dangerous companion. He little thought that he was rather sinned against than sinning.

Dunstan
was to follow him in a week, and only remained behind to discharge necessary business.

The heart of the amorous Edwy beat with delight as he saw his uncle depart, and he made arrangements
at once to spend the night after Dunstan's departure in mirth and
jollity at the house of Ethelgiva and her fair daughter.

He came back after an interview with Redwald on the subject, and found Elfric in their common study.
There was an alcove in the room, and it was covered by a curtain.

"O Elfric," said the prince, "is it not delightful? The two tyrants, the king and the monk, will
soon be gone. I wish the Evil One would fly off with them both, and when the cat is away will
not the mice play? I have made all the arrangements; we shall have such a night at the lady
Ethelgiva's."

"How is the fair Elgiva?"

It was now Edwy's turn to blush and look confused.

"I wish I had the power of teasing you, Elfric. But if you have a
secret you keep it close.

Remember old Dunstan vanishes on the fifteenth, and the same evening, oh, won't it be joyful?
But I am tired of work. Come and let us take some fresh air."

They left the room, when the curtain parted, and the astonished countenance of Father Benedict,
who had been quietly reading in the deep embrasure of the window, presently appeared. He looked
like a man at whose feet a thunderbolt had fallen, and hastily left
the room.

The week passed rapidly away, and at its close Dunstan took his departure.

A train of horses awaited him, and he bade the young princes Edwy and Edgar farewell, with the
usual charge to work diligently and obey Father Benedict.

That same night, after the clerks had sung compline in the chapel, and the chamberlain had seen to the
safety of the palace, Edwy came quietly to the room of his page, and the two left as on the first
occasion. Redwald attended them, and just before the boat left the bank he spoke a word of
caution.

"I fear," he said, in a low tone, "that all is not quite
right. That old fox Dunstan is up to some trick; he has not really
left town."

"Perhaps he has a similar appointment tonight," said
Edwy, sarcastically. "I should keep mine though he and all his monks
from Glastonbury barred the way."

They reached the castellated mansion
of Ethelgiva in due course, and the programme of the former evening
was repeated, save that, if there was any change, the conversation
was more licentious, and the wine cup passed more freely.

It was
midnight, and one of the company was favouring them with a song of
questionable propriety, when a heavy knock was heard at the door.
The servants went to answer it, and all the company awaited the issue
in suspense.

One of the principal domestics returned with haste,
and whispered some words into the ear of Ethelgiva--which seemed to
discompose her.

"What can this mean?" she said. "A guard of soldiers
demand admittance in the king's name?"

A louder knocking attested
the fact.

"You must admit them, or they will batter the door down.
Edwy, Elfric! here, hide yourselves behind that curtain, it veils
a deep recess."

They had scarcely concealed themselves when Dunstan
entered, attended by a guard of the royal hus-carles.

"What means
this insolence?" said Ethelgiva.

"No insolence is intended, royal
lady, nor could be offered to the widow of the Etheling, by me," replied
Dunstan, "but I seek to discharge a sacred trust committed to me.
Where are my pupils, the Prince Edwy and his companion?"

"In their
beds, at the palace, I should suppose."

"Nay, be not so perfidious;
they are here, lady, and probably within hearing; they must come forth,
or I must order the guard to search the house, which I should regret."

"By
whose authority?"

"By that of the king, whose signet is on my hand."

"They
are not here; they left half-an-hour ago."

"Pardon me, madam, if
I observe that we have watched the house for an hour.

"Had not this
scene better terminate?" he added, with icy coldness.

At this moment
a favourite dog, which Edwy had often petted, and which had entered
with the guard, found him out behind the curtain, and in its vociferous
joy betrayed the whole secret.

Confusion or smiles sat on every face
save that of the imperturbable Dunstan.

"Your dog, madam, is more
truthful than its mistress," he said, bluntly yet quietly; and then,
advancing to the recess, he drew aside the curtain and gazed upon
the discovered couple.

"Will you kindly return to the palace with
me?"

"How dare you, insolent monk, intrude upon the pleasures of
your future king?"

"I dare by the orders of the present king, your
royal uncle, who has committed the whole matter into my hands; and,
Prince Edwy, in the discharge of my duty 'dare' is a superfluous word.
Will you, as I said before, both follow me, if you are sufficiently
masters of yourselves to do so?"

The import of all this was seen
at a glance, but there was no course but submission, and Edwy well
knew how utterly indefensible his conduct was; so, with crestfallen
gait, he and Elfric followed their captor to the river, where was
another large boat by the side of their own. They entered it, and
returned to the palace stairs much more sober than on previous occasions.

CHAPTER
VII. "THE KING IS DEAD!--LONG LIVE THE KING!"

The unhappy Elfric
passed the night in a most unenviable frame of mind. He felt distinctly
how utterly he was in the power of Dunstan, and that he could only
expect to return home in disgrace; yet there was no real repentance
in all this: he had sinned and suffered, but although he dreaded punishment
he no longer hated sin.

He scarcely slept at all, and early in the
morning he rose to seek an interview with Edwy, when he found that
he was a prisoner. One of the hus-carles posted at his door forbade
all communication.

Early in the morning the bell sounded for the
early service, still he was not released, and later his breakfast
was brought to him, after which he heard a heavy step approaching,
and Dunstan appeared at the door of the sleeping chamber.

He entered,
and gazed at Elfric for a moment without speaking, as if he would
read his very heart by his face; it was hardly comfortable.

"Elfric,"
he said at last, "do you remember the warning I gave you six months
ago?"

"No," said Elfric, determined, in desperation, to deny everything.

"I
fear you are hardly telling me the truth; you must remember it, unhappy
boy! Why were you not warned in time? Why did you refuse the advice
which might have saved you from all this?"

"Because it was my fate,
I suppose."

"Men make their own fates, and as they make their beds
so must they lie upon them; however, I have not come here to reproach
you, but to bid you prepare to return home."

"Home?--so soon?" said
Elfric.

"Yes, you must leave tomorrow, when a messenger will be prepared
to accompany you, and to explain the cause of your dismissal from
court to your father, whom I most sincerely pity; and let me hope
that you will find leisure to repent of your grievous sin in the solitude
of your native home."

"Must my father be told everything?"

"I fear
he must: you have left us no choice; and it is the better thing, both
for him and for you; he will understand better what steps are necessary
for your reformation--a reformation, I trust, which will be accomplished
in good time, whereat no one will rejoice more than I."

A pert answer
rose to Elfric's lips, but he dared not give utterance to it; the
speaker was too great in his wrath to be defied with impunity.

"Farewell,"
said Dunstan, "would that I could say the word with brighter hopes;
but should you ever repent of your sin, as I trust you may, it will
gladden me to hear of it. I fear you may have done great harm to England
in the person of her future king, but God forgive you in that case." Well, he niver went to th' schooil, but yet he wor one o' th' mooast
genius chaps 'at iver yo met i' yor life; he'd a way ov his own o' dooin iverything. Aw've
heeard mi fayther tell 'at when he wor a lad, ther wor a family o' five on 'em, an' they all
worked at th' factory, an' as lads will, they sometimes stopt aat soa lat ov a neet 'at they
fan it varry hard wark to get up next mornin; an' they had to be up at five o'clock 'coss they'd
a long way to walk. Nah, mi gronfayther could nawther get up nor call aat, but ha do yo think
he managed to get' 'em aat o' bed? He used to allus keep abaat a barro looad o' brokken bricks
at his bedside, an' th' lads used to know as sooin as they felt 'em flyin abaat ther heeads
'at it wor time to be stirrin: one used to be enuff in a general way, but th' second wor sure
to do it, even if he wor a hard sleeper, an' if th' third didn't wakken him, yo could book
him for a tombstooan ony minit. Nah that's what aw call technical eddication."

"Well, if throwin bricks at a chaps heead is technical eddication, aw dooant see 'at we want
a Schooil Booard to taich us that," said Jabez, "for ther's lots 'at can manage that job withaat.
Nah awl tell yo what technical eddication is as yo all seem fast amang it."

"Well, if tha can lawse us, we desarve putting in a pooak an' shakkin up," said Michael, low
down, but just loud enough to be heard.

"Aw heeard thi what tha sed Michael, but technical eddication is that sooart 'at taiches 'em
a trade, an aw think its a varry sensible thing, 'an aw for one am i' favor ov a Schooil Board,
'an if we dooant get one up, ther's sure to be some o' them local board chaps at will, an'
aw consider this to be a varry gooid time to consider th' subject, 'an depend on it, them 'at
start it will have th' best chonce o' being vooated in members; an' as nooan on us but Michael
has ony public office, aw beg to propooas 'at we form ussen into a quorum an mak application
for a Schooil Booard, an' aw beg also to propooas 'at Michael is th' cheerman."

This last proposition was a varry good hit, for he knew that if Michael had the chance to be
chairman, that he would not care a farthing what the object might be,--and there are a many
like Michael in that particular.

Michael hum'd and ha'd a few times, but at last he overcame his scruples and said, "he didn't
know but what it wor for th' best, and if it wornt, if it had to be done they might as weel
have th' honor o' doin it as onybody else."

They held a meeting, but it would be useless for me to attempt to make you understand their
arguments, for I did not, and I am pretty well convinced that they were similarly situated;
but at last it was unanimously resolved that they should have a School Board, and Simon called
for pen, ink, and paper to draw up a petition, and he began in a very promising manner, and
proceeded very well until he came to the word technical, then he scratched his head.

"What's to do nah?" said Michael.

"Ha do yo spell technical?" said Simon, "is there a K in it?"

"Ho eea! ther must be a K in it," said Dick, "let's see, teck, neck, peck, reck, check, deck,
leck;--hi! ther must be a K in it, ther's a K i' all words o' that sooart."

"Well, but aw believe ther isn't a K in it for all that," said Simon, "but whear's ther an
old newspaper, we can happen find it mentioned thear."

So he got an old paper, and whilst he was running down the columns, the rest of the members
were arranging when they could have th' furst feed at th' heead o' th' Booard.

"Nah," he said, "awve fun it."

"An' ther's a K in it ov coarse," sed Michael.

"As it happens tha'rt wrang for once," said Simon, "for ther isn't."

"Then ther owt to be, that's all, but aw dooant put ony faith i' newspapers, for when aw wor
wed, they put in my name Michael withaat a K."

"Well, that wor reight enough, ther isnt a K i' Michael."

"Oh, isnt ther?--varry gooid,--aw know 'at my dowter spells it wi' a K an' shoo's a pupil taicher,
soa shoo owt to know," said Michael.

"Thy dowter be blowed! tha wants to ram thy dowter daan ivery body's throit."

"Do aw?--Awd be looath to ram her daan thy throit anyway, tho it wodnt be sich a varry hard
job, for thi maath's ommost big enuff."

"If its ony bigger accordingly nor thy nooas awl be smoored; but tha con tak th' Schooil Board
an thi dowter too for what aw care, an' mich gooid may shoo do thi, for awl niver be under
a cheerman at spells Michael wi' a K.

"Nah chaps," said Dick Dardust, "dont yo fratch."

"Simon does reight to fratch," said another, "Michael has noa business allus to be draggin
in his dowter if shoo is a schooil mistress. My wife's sister-i'-law had a hont 'at wor a schooil
mistress, an' aw dooant keep reapin it up."

As each of them had had their pints replenished a number of times during the discussion, the
old saying that "when drink's in wit is out," began to be illustrated; and there was such an
uproar in the place that the landlord was compelled to send for some policemen to assist him
in turning them out, and when they had gone he muttered to himself, as he picked up the broken
pints, "Schooil Booards! its time they'd summat. What do they want wi' Schooil Booards? Aw
niver went to th' schooil an' luk at me! why aw could sup a 18 gallon to mi own cheek an net
mak soa mich bother."

Whilst all this had been going on, a few of the quiet and unassuming people of the village
had met at the school room for the purpose of considering the same subject. The clergyman was
in the chair, and as might be expected, the business was carried on in a very different manner,
and they decided to hold a public meeting, and give all an opportunity to express their opinions.
Judge the dismay of the pot house Solomons, when they saw the village placarded with announcements
on which the words "School Board," were in very large letters. They at once set about raising
some opposition, for they felt themselves aggrieved.

Michael and Simon o'th' Lee happened to meet as they were going to work. "Nah Simon, tha sees
what a mess thy stupid wark's getten us into. If tha hadn't sed ther wornt a K i' technical
it ud niver ha' come to this."

"If tha hadn't sed 'at ther wor a K i' Michael it would niver ha happened, an' ther isnt a
K i' technical."

"Well, happen net, but ther is a K i' Michael, becoss my dowter says--"

"Thy dowter's a fooil! shoo taks after her faither!" said Simon, as he walked away.

"Ha ha, ha! Well shoo hasnt lived to thy age withaat leearnin to know at ther's a K i' Michael,"
he shouted after him.

But the public meeting was held, and there was some very strong opposition, and Michael made
a very long speech against School Boards, for he said that "his dowter wor a pupil taicher,
an' shoo sed 'at Schooil Booards wor nobbut necessary i' them places whear they required 'em,
an' he should propooas 'at this meetin wor ov opinion 'at this question should stand ovver
until his dowter wor old enuff to have a schooil ov her own, an' if shoo couldn't eddicate
fowk up to th' mark, it wod be time enuff to have a Schooil Booard then."

"Gooid lad, Michael!" said one.

"Michael wi' a K!" said another.

"Goa home to thi dowter, an' tell her to give thi brains a soap lather!" shouted a voice that
was verry like unto Simon's.

There was a good deal of uproar for a time, but the meeting at length decided by a vote of
ten to one in favour of a school board, so the opposition did no good after all, and Michael's
daughter will have to take her chance.

Tha Caps me Nah!

"Has ta heeard th' news?"

"Niver a word! What's up?"

"Old Duke's getten wed."

"Nay, tha caps me nah! An' who's th' gurt maddlin getten wed to? Awst ha thowt he'd gettin
to old to do that."

"He's wed Mary o' Nathan's o'th' Sludge Hoil."

"Well, tha does cap me nah! Why, he's old enuff to be her gronfayther ommost. A'a dear, A'a
dear! Whativer wor shoo thinkin on? But I reckon shoo mud have a felly o' some sooart; but
awd ha waited a bit longer if awd been her befoor awd ha' taen up wi' old Duke; besides he's
a peg leg."

"Well shoo may'nt like him ony war for that, an' tha sees it'll save her a bit o' trouble,
for shoo'll nobbut have one booit to black. But shoo's a trimmer, an' if he doesn't live to
rue his bargain, awst be chaited. Shoo play'd him one o'th' nicest tricks, th' day after they
gate wed 'at awve heeard tell on for a long time."

"Ha wor that?"

"Well, tha sees he gate rayther fresh o'th' weddin day, an' he wor varry dry when he wakken'd
next mornin, soa he sed he'd get up an' goa as far as 'Th' Quiet Corner,' for a leck on; but
shoo tell'd him he'd ha to do nowt o'th' sooart, for it wor ill enough to have a druffen chap
at neet withaat havin one 'at started as sooin as he gate up. But he sed he should goa, an'
shoo said he should'nt, an' they started o' threapin, but what does shoo do when he worn't
lukkin, but shoves his peg leg up th' flue, an' he sowt it all ovver but couldn't find it?"

"That wor a cunnin trick onyway, but what sed Duke?"

"He had to stop at hooam ov cooarse, for shoo wod'nt tell him whear it wor until he promised
net to goa near th' alehouse that day, an it had getten towards neet when he promised and as
shoo'd kept a gooid fire all th' time it had getten a fairish warmin, and' old Duke noa sooiner
gate it on an' wor walkin abaat a bit, nor it mashed like a pot, an' he fell his whoallength
on to th' floor with his heead i'th' coilskep."

"Nay, tha does cap me nah! Ther'd be a bonny rumpus awl bet. Did ta hear?"

"Aw heeard nowt noa farther, nobbut some ov his chums gate to know, an soa they made a subscription,
an' bowt him another, an' they had it painted red, white and blue, an' sent it lapt up i' silk
paper. Old Duke wor ommost malancholy when he saw it, but Mary nobbut laft, an started on an'
blackleeaded it, an' in a varry little time he wor set i'th' 'Quiet Corner,' wi as handsome
a peg leg as tha'd wish to see. They chaff him a gooid bit abaat weddin Mary, but he taks it
all i' gooid part, an' they've sent all sooarts o' presents to him. One day last week they
sent him a creddle, an' Mary wor soa mad wol shoo gate th' blocker an' wor baan to chop it
into chips, and wol shoo wor stormin on, a little lad coom to th' door an' sed, 'please aw've
browt a pair o' specteckels for old Duke to rock th' creddle in.' An' shoo catched him a drive
at side o'th' heead, wol his een fair blazed, an th' specteckels flew into th' middle o'th' rooad."

"Well, but it wor hardly reight on her to claat th' lad, coss he knew nowt abaat it."

"Why tha sees shoo didn't just think abaat it, but shoo made it all reight at after an gave
him a butter cake, an' old Duke sam'd up th' specs, an' after saigin th' heead off, he turned
th' creddle into a manger for his donkey."

"Well, tha caps me! But has ta heeard abaat that barrel o' ale runnin away throo old Nipsomes
tother wick?"

"Noa, ha wor that? Aw hardly thowt he'd ony ale 'at had strength to run away."

"O but he has, for th' last gill awe gate fit three on us, an' we left some then. But it wor
sellable stuff, awve had war:--net mich. But awl tell thi abaat this barrel. Th' brewery cart
wor liverin some, an' tha knows their ale-cellar door is just at th' top o'th' old hill, an
th' cartdriver let a barrel slip, an' away it roll'd daan th' hill slap agean th' gas lamp,
an' it braik th' pooast i' two, an off it went till it coom to th' wall at th' bottom, when
th' barrel end brast aat an' all th' ale wor wasted. Soa tha sees ther must ha been some strength
in it if it could braik a iron lamp pooast; an' it wor nobbut common ale."

"Well th' loss wodn't be soa varry mich after all, they'll get ovver it. But has ta heeard
they're gooin to turn Bill Summerscales' tripe shop into a limited liability company?"

"Nay, it's niver true, is it?"

"Its true enuff, for aw've been tell'd all abaat it bi a chap 'ats had it throo Bill hissen,
but its a saycret tha knows, soa tha munnot tell onybody; but what does ta think on it?"

"Well aw hardly know what to think, but it seems to me 'at ther'll be noa limit to th' limited's
in a bit. But what's th' shares to be, has ta heeard?"

"Ho e'ea! Ther's to be two hundred shares at a shillin a piece; nineteen twentieths he's baan
to keep for hissen, an' his relations are to have th' furst chonce o'th' other, so as it'll
be as mich a family affair as possible. Does ta see, that's done soa as if ivery thing doesn't
work as it should, or ther should be ony fallin off i'th' quality o'th' tripe, they'll keep
it quiet for ther own sakes."

"Well, aw cannot see what iver he's turnin it into a company consarn for?"

"Does ta see, he's rayther fast for that stuff fowk buys pigs wi, an' he's niver been able
to pay for yon shuts painting yet, an' tha sees if theas shares are all taen up, it'll put
him into a bit o' ready brass; an' th' dividend is to be declared once a year, an' th' shareholders
can have ther choice whether they tak it aat i' tripe or trotters; an if th' first years' profit
doesn't run to as mich as'll be a meal a piece, it'll be carried to a presarve fund, though
what presarved tripe 'll be like aw cant tell."

"Well, tha caps me nah! Does ta think o' takkin up a share or two?"

"Aw hardly know yet. If aw tummel ovver as mich on mi way hooam as'll pay th' deposit, aw happen
shall, but net else."

"Well, they'll net be mich i' my line. Who does ta think aw met to-day? Try to guess."

"Net aw marry! Awm noa hand at guessin."

"It wor Jim Wilkins, don'd up like a gentleman. It licks me whear he gets his brass; if ther
isn't a smash up thear some day awst be capt. But he ows me nowt."

"Aw suppose his wife's a varry highty tighty sooart ov a body. Shoo's been browt up at th'
boardin schooil."

"Why then, shoo'll be a poor dowdy in a haase. It's a queer thing, but eddication seems to
mar as mony as it maks. Aw dooant know what Foster's bill may do."

"Is he baan to get wed?"

"Who?"

"Bill Foster."

"Aw ne'er sed owt abaat Bill Foster, aw mean Foster, M. P. for Bradforth. He's browt in a bill
to eddicate fowks childer."

"Ho has he, aw niver heeard on it."

"Why tha'rt awfully behund hand."

"Aw may be i' mi politics, but net i' me payments, an' that's what monny a thaasand connot
say. Aw wonder sometimes ha it wod ha been if iverybody 'at owed owt had been foorced to put
it o'th' census paper. But what does ta think abaat old Strap puttin daan all his five childer
musicianers?"

"Nay aw dooant know, but he wor allus a foxy sooart ov a chap an' he'd have some reason for
it. But ha does ta mak it aat 'at they are all musicians?"

"Why, ther's two bellringers, two drummers, an' one drum hugger, an they all play off nooats,
an' a varry long way off 'em sometimes. Did ta hear tell abaat them two lads o' his havin that
do i'th' church steeple?"

"Noa, indeed aw! Let's have it."

"Well tha knows it happened to be practice neet an' as Ike wor gooin to th' church he bowt
a sheep's pluck an' tuk it wi him, intendin to tak it hooam an have it cooked for ther supper.
He happened to be th' furst 'at gate into th' bell chamer, soa he hung th' sheep pluck up agean
th' wall, an' then went daan agean, leavin a little lamp burnin i'th' steeple. He'd hardly
getten off th' step when his brother coom, an' findin th' door oppen he went up; but befoor
he gate thear, a gust o' wind blew aat th' leet an' all wor as dark as pitch. He thowt it wor
varry strange for he knew Ike had come before him, soa he bawled aat 'Ike!' but nobody spaik.
'Aw know tha'rt up here,' he sed, 'soa let's ha nooan o' thi tricks. Spaik, wi' ta?" but nowt
spaik. Sid felt rayther freetened, but he began to grope all raand th' walls, bein sure his
brother wor thear i'th' dark. All at once his hand coom agean a piece o' liver, an' it felt
soa cold, an' soa mich like a face, 'at he started back, an' as sooin as he could find th'
step, he ran daan as fast as he could, an' when he gate to th' bottom he luk'd at his hand
an' it wor all blooidy. 'Awr Ike's cut his throit,' he sed, 'Whativer mun aw do?' An he wor
just gooin to yell aat 'Police!' when who should come up but his brother. Th' seet on him tuk
a gurt looard off Sid's mind, but yet he wor varry freetened. 'What's th' matter, Sid,' sed
his brother, 'tha luks ill; Isn't th' pluck all reight?' 'Th' pluck's gooan,' sed Sid, shakkin
his heead an' puttin his hand on his heart. 'Gooan!--Aw'll niver goa into that bell-chamer
ageean as long as aw live! Aw've allus sed, if a chap 'll rob another ov his livin, he'll rob
him ov his life if he's a chonce.'"

"'Well aw wor just thinkin a gooin for th' police,' sed Sid, 'but we dooant know who it is.'
Its one o'th' ringers as sure as we're here.' 'Hi, its one o'th' ringers noa daat, but aw hooap
he hasn't a wife an' a lot o' childer.' 'Well,' sed Ike, 'if he has, an taks it hooam for 'em
to ait, aw hooap it'll chooak th' lot on 'em.' Just as he sed this, all th' rest o'th' ringers
coom up, an' were capt to find Ike an' Sid soa excited, soa pairt cluthered raand one an' pairt
raand tother, an' Sid tell'd one lot 'at a chap had cut his throit i'th' bell chamer, an' Ike
tell'd tother 'at somdy'd stown his sheep's pluck. 'Well we mun goa an see,' sed some on 'em,
an they gate some leets an away they went up. Ike wor th' first an' Sid th' last. When they
gate into th' chamer, Ike saw th' pluck hung up just whear he'd left it, an' he turned raand
an' saw Sid peepin off th' corner o'th' door. 'This is one o' thy tricks, Sid,' sed Ike, but
th' words wor hardly aat ov his maath befoor Sid wor on his knees declaring, 'at he'd niver
harmed onybody i' all his life. 'Tha's noa need to goa onto thi knees abaat it onyway,' sed
Ike, 'haiver, hear it is, soa all's reight, tha con hug it up hooam for me; an' he gave it
him. Sid wor soa taen, wol he put up his hands to mak sure 'at he worn't asleep; an' th' chaps
'at he'd been tellin his tale to, began to smell a rat, an' at last it wor all explained, an'
niver mind if ther worn't some laffin an' chaffin. Poor Sid gets plagued abaat it yet, for
ommost ivery body's getten to know, an' if onnybody, livin abaat that church, wants a sheep's
heead an' a pluck, they order th' butcher to send 'em a New-Taan Boggard."

"Well tha caps me nah!"

"Gooid neet.--Awr Mally 'll think aw'm niver comin."

"Gooid neet.--But is it true?"

"True!--It's just as true as all sich like."

"A'a, well,--tha caps me nah!"

Nay Fer Sewer!

Nay fer sewer!" sed Betty Longtongue, as Sally Jibjab had finished tellin her 'at one o' th'
neighbor's husband's had getten turned off. "Well, awm capt he didn't get seck'd long sin,
for they tell me he wor niver liked amang th' work fowk, an' awm sure aw've seen him go in
to his wark monny a time a full clock haar after awr lot's had to be thear. But aw thawt he'd
find his level at last, an' awm net oft mistakken, far aw can see a hoil in a stee as weel
as th' maaast."

"Why but it has'nt been owt abaat his wark 'at he's been seck'd for, but him an' two or three
moor have been playin a trick o' Jane Sucksmith's husband, an' its getten to th' maister's
ears, an' soa they seck'd him thear an' then."

"Nay fer sewer! whatever will ta say! Why what has he been dooin? Same mak o' pousement aw'll
be bun for't."

"Well, aw can nobbut tell th' tale as it wor tell'd to me tha knows; but her 'at tell'd me,
had it tell'd bi somdy 'at had heeard it throo one 'at owt to know, soa its true enuff. It
seems old Sucksmith had been drinkin tother day, an' he must ha getten moor nor he could carry,
an' tha knows as weel as me 'at he can sup moor nor what ud mak some fowk druffen, an' walk
as steady as if he'd swallow'd a church, steeple an' all; an' he ligg'd him daan o' some sheets
o' wool 'at wor bi th' rooad side, an' as Musty wor goain past he saw him, an' soa he thowt
he'd have a marlock, an' he went an' fun up some ov his chums an' they gate sooit an' daub'd
his face wol he luk'd war nor old Scrat hissen."

"Nay fer sewer! Why they mud easily do that aw believe, for he's nooan a gooid favvor'd chap
at th' best hand."

"Noa he isn't, but they worn't content wi' that but Musty went an' gate some sooart o' paader
'at they use to dye red worset an' sich like stuff wi', an he tuk off his cap an' sprinkled
it all amang his toppin, an then they left him, an' in a bit he wakken'd up, for all th' childer
ith district wor gethered raand him, starin at him. Just then Musty, 'at had been waiting abaat,
reckoned to come past in a great hurry, an' as sooin as he saw Sucksmith, he set up a gurt
shaat o' laffin, an says, "Whativer has ta been doain, aw niver saw sich a freet i' mi life."
Sucksmith wor reight gaumless for a while, but he says, "What is ther to laff at? Did ta niver
see me befoor thinks ta?" "Well aw niver saw thi luk like that affoar onnyway. Whoiver is it
'at's been playin thee this trick?"

"What trick does ta meean?" he sed.

"Why doesn't ta know at thi face is all daubed wi sooit?"

Sucksmith put up his hand to feel, an' when he saw his fingers all grimed, he sed, "Aw wish
aw knew who'd done this, Musty; awd be straight wi' him, an sooin too. To think 'at a chap
connot fall asleep in a Kristine country withaat havin his face painted war nor a paysayger,
but awst find it aght someday."

"Well, aw think its th' best plan to goa wi' me to th' "Blue Dunnock," sed Musty, an' gie thisen
a gooid wesh."

Soa they went an' all Musty's mates wor set waitin in another raam.

Th' landlady wor varry gooid i' findin him some sooap an' watter, o'th' sinkstooan, an' he
started to give hissen a reight gooid swill, an as sooin as th' watter gate to this stuff 'at
they'd put ov his heead, it began to roll daan th' color o' blooid, an' as sooin as he oppen'd
his e'en he saw it, an' he thowt at first it must be his nooas 'at wor bleedin, an' as th'
landlady worn't abaat, he blew his nooase oth towel to see, but it worn't, then he put up his
hand to his heead an' thear it wor sure enuff. He ommost fell sick when he saw it, an' he called
for Musty as laad as he could, to see what wor to do. "Whativer's th' matter wi me thinks ta,
Musty? Just Iuk, awm bleedin like a pig."

"A'a, dear, A'a dear! Why tha must ha brokken a blooid vessel."

"Aw think awve brokken two or three," sed Sucksmith "but what mun aw do?"

"Sewse thi heead wi cold watter; ther's nowt stops bleedin like cold watter. Why, if tha gooas
on tha'll bleed to th' deeath."

"Aw begin to feel faint already," sed Sucksmith, as he started o' throwin moor watter on his
heead; but th' moor he put on an' th' moor blooid seemed to come, an' he sed, "Oh, dear! aw
believe awm done for this time, Musty; doesn't ta think tha'd better send for a doctor?"

When he lifted up his heead, Musty wor foorced to turn away for a minit to get a straight face,
for Sucksmith's wor dyed th' color ov a raw beef steak, an' his heead luk'd like one o' them
red door mats 'at tha's seen. But Musty advised him to goa on wi' th' watter, an' he did, an'
in a while it begun to have less colour in it, an' Sucksmith's mind began to feel a bit easier.

"Aw think its ommost gien ovver nah," he sed, but luk at mi hands! why they're like a piece
o' scarlet cloath."

"Eea, an thi face is th' same; tha luks to me as if tha'd getten th' scarlet-fayvor, an' awm
sure ther's summat nooan reight wi' thi; but wipe thisen an' come into tother hoil, ther's
some o' thi mates thear, an' we'll see what they say."

Sucksmith did as he wor tell'd, an' went into tother raam with Musty, but ther wor sich a crack
o' laffin as sooin as he showed his heead, wol they mud ha fell'd him wi' a bean. "Nah lads,"
sed Musty, "yo shouldn't laff at a chap's misfortunes, an' awm sure ther's Summat matter wi
awr friend Sucksmith, aw tell him it must be th' scarlet fayvor.'

"Well aw niver saw sich a heead i' mi life," sed another, "but its nooan th' scarlet fayvor;
my belief is its th' cattle plague, an if it is, an' th' police gets to know they'll have him
shot, bi th' heart will they, for they've orders to destroy ivery livin thing 'at shows ony
signs o' havin it. But whear has ta been to get it thinks ta?"

"Nay, awve been nowhere 'at aw know on," sed Sucksmith, "aw felt all reight a bit sin, an'
aw ligg'd daan o' some sheets o' wool an' fell asleep, an' aw niver knew aw ail'd owt wol aw
coom in here to wesh me."

"Why then it will be th' cattle plague, its nowt else, ther's a deal o' sheep had it lately;
an' varry likely that's some o' ther wool 'at tha's been sleepin on. But ha does ta feel?"

"Oh, aw feel varry mich alike all ovver,--awm feeared its up we me ommost, an' this has come
for a warnin, for aw havn't behaved misen reight latly. But if awm spared to get ovver this
awl alter."

"Why tha luks as if tha'd awther getten a warnin or a warmin, bith color o' thi face," sed
one, "but aw think tha'd do wi' a glass o' summat to cooil thi daan a bit,--a red Indian's
a fooil to thi."

"It must be summat serious," sed another, "are ta th' same color all ovver?"

"Aw dooant know awm sure, an'. aw havn't strength to luk," he sed.

But one o'th' chaps roll'd up his briches slop to see; "Nay, thi leg is all reight." "Well,"
sed Musty, "tha knows it may be soa, for we've heeard tell o' th' fooit and maath desease,
an' this may be th' heead an' hand complaint. But what do yo think it'll be th' best for him
to do?"

"I shuild advise him to goa hooam at once, but if ony body should see him they'll varry likely
tak him for a literary chap becoss he's so deeply red." "Well, whether they tak him for a little-hairy
chap or net, he'll pass for a red hairy chap an' noa mistak," sed Hiram.

But Sucksmith fancied he felt soa waik wol he didn't think he'd be able to walk hooam, soa
after all biddin him "gooid bye," for fear they mud niver see him agean an one chap axin him
to be sure an' tell his first wife if he met her up aboon, 'at he'd getten wed to her sister,
they sent him hooam in a cab.

"Nay fer sewer! Whativer wi ta say? An' whativer did their Margit say when shoo saw him? He
must ha luk'd a pictur."

"Nay, aw dooant know what shoo sed, but ther wor a rare racket ith' hoil awl a-warrant thi.
But th' gurt softheead stuck in it, 'at he wor poorly, an' as shoo saw he wornt sober shoo
humoured him wi lettin him goa to bed. Next mornin he'd come to his senses a bit, soa shoo
let him have sich a bit o' tongue as he hadn't had latly, for tha knows shoo's a glaid when
shoo starts, for if awd to say quarter as mich to my felly as shoo says to him sometimes, he'd
niver darken th' door agean. He began to see what a fooil they'd been makkin on him, an' he
gate up intendin to goa to his wark, but when he saw hissen ith' seamin glass, he couldn't
fashion, an' soa he began o' weshin hissen first i' cold watter an' then i' hot; but it wor
what they call a fast color, an' he couldn't get it to stir do what he wod.

"What mun aw do, Margit?" he sed, when he'd swill'd his heead wi' hot watter wol it wor hauf
boiled; "th' moor aw wesh it an' th' breeter it seems to get. If iver aw get all reight agean
ther's somdy'll want a new suit o' clooas, but it'll be a wooden en."

"Hold thi noise, lumpheead," shoo sed, "an' get thi braikfast an awl see if aw connot do summat
for thi. Aw expect it'll have to be scaar'd off."

Soa after th' braikfast shoo made him ligg daan o' th' hearthstooan, an' shoo gate some wire
scale an' started o' scrubbin one side ov his head, as if shoo'd been polishin th' fender;
but he couldn't stand that, an' he laup'd up, an' donced up an' daan th' hoil, sayin all sooarts
o' awkward things.

"What the dickens are ta thinkin on," he sed, "does ta fancy awm made o' cast-iron?"

"Aw dooan't know what tha'rt made on, but aw know tha artn't made o'th' reight sooart o' stuff
for a fayther ov a family to be made on; but if tha connot get it off thisen, an' tha weant
let me, tha'll be forced to stop as tha art, that's all." An' away shoo flew aat o' th' haase
and left him.

"Nay fer sewer! An' whativer did he do?"

Well, he set daan and studied a bit, then he sent for a doctor, net becoss he felt poorly,
but becoss he wanted to know what to do to get it off. Soa th' doctor coom, an' they say he
couldn't spaik for iver soa long, for laffin at him; an' he tell'd him he'd be monny a week
befoor he gate reight, an' it wod have to wear off by degrees; but his hair, he sed, wod niver
be reight, soa he mud as weel have it shaved off sooin as lat. Soa he sent for Timmy, th' barber,
an' had it done, an' when his wife coom back, thear he wor set, lukkin for all th' world like
a lot o' old clooas wi' a ball o' red seealin wax stuck at th' top; an' thear he is i'th' haase
nah, whear he'll ha to stop wol his hair grows agean.

"Nay fer sewer! An does he niver goa aat?"

"Niver,--he did goa to th' door one day when Hiram's little lass went to borrow th' looaf tins,
but shoo wor soa freetened, wol shoo ran hooam, an' her mother says shoo believes shoo's gooin
to have soor een; mun, he's flaysome to luk at, an' th' child has niver been like hersen sin,
an' shoo connot sleep ov a neet for dreamin abaat it."

"Nay fer sewer! An what says Musty?"

"Awve niver heeard what he's sed sin he lost his shop, but Sucksmith says he's noan gooin to
let it rest, for he'll send 'em some law if it costs him a paand--An' Musty says he doesn't
care ha sooin for he wod be sure ov a bit o' summat to ait if he wor sent daan th' rails--but
aw think it'll get made up agean. But awve left yond child ith' creddle bi hersen, soa aw mun
be off." Away shoo went an' Sally watched her aat o'th seet, an' then sank into a cheer, roll'd
up her arms in her appron, stared into th' fire, an' sed, "Nay fer sewer! Well ov all!--Nay
fer sewer!"

Th' Battle o' Tawkin.

"Tha'rt a liar if iver ther wor one! An' that's a hard thing to say, but aw wodn't hang a cat
o' thi word! It's as sure yor Alick 'at's brokken awr winder, as awm standin here, an' tha
knows it too!"

"Aw say it isn't awr Alick, for he's niver been aat 'oth' haase this blessed day! Tha's awther
brokken it thisen or' else one o' thi own's done it,--an' they are a lot 'oth' warst little
imps 'at iver lived; an' if aw mud ha' mi mind on 'em, awd thresh' em to within an inch o'
ther lives! But yo can expect nowt noa better when yo know what a bringin up they've had."

"They've had a different bringin up to what ony o' thine's likely to have, but whativer comes
o' ther bringin up, yo'll have to pay for that winder, for it isn't th' first he's brokken,
an' if yo dooant, next time I catch him, awl have it aat ov his booans.'

"Let me catch thee ligging a finger o' one o' mine, an' awl mak this fold too little for thee,
an' sharply too; ha can ta fashion! A gurt strappin woman like thee, to mell ov a child? Tha
owt to be 'shamed o' thi face! But tha has noa shame an' niver had."

"Well if tha's ony its nobbut latly come to thi! Awve too much shame to come hooam druffen
of a neet after th' neighbors has getten to bed."

"Whoas come hooam druffen? Does ta mean to say 'at aw wor iver druffen? Aw'll mak thee prove
thi words if ther's a law 'ith land 'at can do it! Aw'll let thee see 'at my keracter is as
gooid as onybody's, an' a deal better nor sich as thine."

"Aw niver sed who it wor 'at coom hooam druffen, but aw dar say tha can guess."

"If its onnybody its thisen! gurt brussen thing 'at tha art! Who is it 'at sends ther poor
husband to his wark wi' a sup o' teah an' dry cake, an' then cooks a beefsteak to ther own
breakfast? Can ta tell me that?"

"If aw connot, tha can, an' that isn't all;--can ta tell me who it is 'at invites th' neighbors
to rum and teah 'ith' after nooin, when they know th' husband's gooin to work ovver? Can ta
tell me that?"

"Well, if ther's been onny rum an' teah stirrin, tha's allus takken gooid care to have thi
share on it, but they've allus been wimmen 'ats' come to awr haase when th' maister's been
aat, that's one blessin."

"Does ta meean to say 'at ther's onny fellies been to awr haase when th' husband's been off?
Tha'd better mind what tha says or else that cap o' thine ul suffer!"

"Aw dooant say onny fellies has been;--tha should know th' best, but awm nawther blind nor
gaumless. But aw'll tell th' what tha art;--Tha'rt a nasty, ill contrived gooid-for-nowt, an'
all th' neighbors say soa, an' they wish to gooidness tha'd flit, an' all at belangs to thi,
for ther's niver onny peace whear tha ar't."

"Noa, an' ther niver will be onny peace wol tha pays for yond winder! Does ta think fowk's
nowt else to do wi' ther brass, but to put in winders for yor Alick to mash?"

"Aw tell thi he hasn't mash'd it, for he's niver cross'd th' doorstun sin he gate up. Th' fact
is he's niver getten up yet, for he isn't at hooam, for he's aboon twenty miles off, at his
gronmothers."

"Dooant tell me that! Ther's awr Vaynus comin, he knows who mash'd it. Vaynus! Who wor it 'at
mash'd yond winder? Nah tell a lie at thi peril,--did ta see it brokken?"

"Eea, aw saw Topsy jump up at th' birdcage, an' it missed it click an' tumbled throo th' winder."

"A'a I drabbit that cat! Aw'll as sure screw its neck raand as awm livin!"

"Nah tha sees, aw tell'd thi it worn't awr Aleck!"

"Noa, it couldn't ha been! Are ta sure tha saw yond cat do it, Vaynus?"

"Eea awm sure aw saw it."

"Why then it wornt yor Alick! An aw hardly thowt it wor, for he's abaat as quiet a lad an'
as daycent a one as ther is abaat here. Aw oft tell awrs to tak a lesson throo him."

"Ther's noa better lad iver breathed nor awr Alick;--aw dooant say'at he's better nor onnybody's
else, but he's as gooid. An' awm sure tha's a lot ov as fine childer as onnybody need set e'en
on, an' if they are a bit wild, what can yo expect when ther's soa monny on 'em. But aw mun
get these clooas dried wol ther's a bit o' druft. Wi' ta leean me that clooas prop o' thine agean?"

"Vaynus! What are ta dooin? Goa fetch that prop this minit, an' see 'at tha allus brings it
when tha sees her weshin, withaat lettin her allus have to ax for it."

"Well, awm soa glad it worn't awr Alick 'at mashed that winder."

"Soa am aw, awd rayther it had been one o' mi own bi th' hauf. What time does ta think tha'll
ha done weshin?"

"Abaat four o'clock if awm lucky."

"Well, wi ta step across an' have a cup o' teah wi us?"

"Eea, aw dooant mind if aw do."

"Owd Tommy."

(A Yorkshire Sketch.)

Of all the seasons of the year,--that portion when winter treads upon the skirts of the retiring
autumn, always seems to me to be most deeply fraught with sorrowful associations. A few short
weeks before, one has beheld the year in stately pride, loaded with blessings, and adorned
in nature's most luxurious garb, waters in silvery streams have lightly leaped and bounded
in the shadow of the waving ferns,--and little flowers have nodded on the brink and peered
into the crystal depths, as though in love with their reflected loveliness;--the little hills
have decked their verdant breasts with floral gems, and the frowning crags have seemed to smile,
and from their time-worn crevices have thrust some wandering weed, whose emerald tints have
lent a soothing softness to the hard outline of their rugged fronts. The feathered songsters
on untiring wing, have flitted in the sunny sky, pouring forth melodious sounds in thankfulness
and joy, as though their little hearts were filled too full of happiness and overflowed in
drops of harmony.

Light fleecy cloud's like floating heaps of down have sailed along the azure sky, casting their
changing shadows on the earth, whilst sighing winds have whispered soothing songs amongst the
rustling leaves, and ripened fruits have hung in tempting show their sun-burnt fronts, courting
the thirsty lip, to tell us in their silent eloquence that the year has gained its prime.

Even when the ice-king reigns, and howlling storms drive with remorseless fury o'er the plains,
or wreck their vengeance on the sturdy woods,--roaring amongst the pliant branches, and entwining
around the knarled trunks, uprooting some as though in sport to show its giant strength. And
the cascade which formerly leaped forth from sylvan nooks where the wild flowers half hid its
source, and bathed themselves in the ascending mist,--now roaring down in sullied swollen force,
bearing along the wrecks of summer beauties,--tumbling and hissing through its frost bordered
bed,--growling in foaming rage around the rocks which here and there protrude their sullen
face to check its mad career;--even this has much of majesty and beauty, and claims our admiration.
But when some glories of the autumn yet remain, and e'er stern winter has usurped the sway,--one
wide-wide field of death and desolation is all that's left for man to ponder over;--fading
flowers, trembling and shrinking in the raw cold blast;--half naked trees, that day by day
present a more weird aspect--fields still green, but stripped of every gem;--whilst still some
russet warbler may be heard chirping in sorrow and distress, and heavy looking clouds anxious
to screen the cheering ray, which now and then bursts forth with sickly smile, that seems like
ill-timed mirth amongst the dead.

On such a time as this, and in the early Sabbath morning, might be seen a stalwart farmer strolling
o'er the hills which command a view of the little but interesting village of Luddenden.

I do not think that the dreary look of decaying beauties had much effect upon him,--the pale
blue smoke that issued from his mouth, in measured time, seemed to afford him every consolation.
He evidently saw some one approaching in whom he was interested. Having satisfied himself that
he was not mistaken, he began talking aloud:--

"Oi! that's him sure enough; nah whativer can owd Tommy want laumering over thease hills at
this time o'th' morning? He's a queer chap, takkin him all i' all; an' still if ought should
happen him aw doant know where they'd find his marrow; he's been th' same owd Tommy iver sin
aw wor a lad, an' aw'm noa chicken nah--he said--stroking a few grey hairs, which, like a tuft
of frosted grass, adorned his ruddy cheeks. Aw sud think he's saved a bit o' brass bi this
time, for he wor allus a nipper; but he wor allus honest, an' it isn't ivery man yo meet i'th
world 'at's honest; but aw doant think Tommy ud wrang ony body aght o'th' vally o' that;"--saying
which, he snapped his finger and thumb together to denote its worthlessness.

A few minutes more and Tommy might be plainly seen slowly ascending the somewhat rugged road
toward the spot where stood the farmer leaning against the wall awaiting him. I could not better
occupy the time that intervenes than endeavour to picture the approaching traveller. His age
I would not dare to guess, he might be 60, or he might be 90. He was a short thick-set man,
and rather bent, but evidently more from habit than from weight of years. He wore a long blue
coat which plainly spoke of years gone by, and bore in many places unmistakable evidence that
Tommy was no friend to tailors; beneath this an old crimson plush waistcoat, that had long
since done its duty, some drab knee-breeches, and a pair of dark grey stockings which hid their
lower extremities in a pair of shoes about large enough to make two leather cradles; on his
head a hat that scorned to shine, and in his hand he carried an oaken staff; his small grey
eyes glistened with a spark of latent wit, whilst on his face was stamped in unequivocal characters
some quaint originality.

"Gooid morning, Tommy," said the farmer.

"Gooid morning Dick," replied Tommy, "it's a nice day ower th' head but fearful heavy under
th' fooit."

"You're reight," said Dick, "but where are yo trapesing to this morning?"

"Waw, aw'm gooin as far as Dick's o' Tom's at th' Durham, to get my tooa nails cut," said Tommy.

"Well, yo'll happen bait a bit and ha a wiff o' bacca wi' me, for its a long time sin aw saw
yo afoor," said Dick.

"Waw, aw dooant mind if aw have a rick or two, but aw munnot stop long, for it luks rayther
owercussen up i'th' element; but ha's that lad o' thine getting on sin he wed quiet Hannah
lass? Aw've wondered sometimes if he wod'nt rue his bargain,--is shoo as fat as sho wor?"

"Eea, shoo keeps i' varry gooid order, shoo puts her mait into a better skin nor th' mooast;
they didn't hit it soa well at th' furst, for shoo wor varry waspish, an' tha knows awr Joa's
as queer as Dick's hatband, when he's put aght a bit. One morning, abaght a wick after they
wor wed, Joa woran't varry weel, an' had to ligg i' bed a bit,--shoo gate up to muck th' beeas,--(for
shoo can do a job like that, tha knows, when shoo's a mind.)"

"Eea! eea!" said Tommy, "noabody better,--shoo's a pair o' gooid end,--shoo's nooan afeared
o' dipping her finger i' water, nut shoo."

"Well, aw tell thi, shoo gate up, an' in a while shoo call'd aght 'at his porridge wor ready
when he liked to come daan, an' then shoo went aght. Soa in a bit, he gate up, an' th' pan
wor stood o' th' rib flopping away rarely. Well, he gate a plate, an' thowt he'd tern' em aght
to cooil, when asteead o' porrige, aght come th' dish claat slap on to his fooit;--talk abaght
single step doncing!--tha should just ha seen him; he ommost lauped clean ower th' breead flaik;--an'
thear shoo stood grinning at him throo th' winder, an' he wor soa mad--he wuthered th' pan
fair at her head;--he miss'd his aim an' knock'd th' canary cage to smithereens, th' cat gate
th' burd, an' th' pan fell into th' churn. Nah, what wod ta think ov a thing like that?"

"Waw, its just loike one ov her tricks;-tha knows shoo wor allus a trimmer o' one, Dick."

"Shoo wor, Tommy, an shoo allus will be to her deeing day. It put awr Joa into a awful passhian,
but shoo didn't care a pin, shoo said shoo'd lived too long near a wood' to be fear'd ov a
hullet,--but they're as reight as Dick and Liddy nah. Aw'll tell thi ha that happens. Tha knows,
awr Joa allus thowt a deeal ov his mother, an he wanted th' wife to do i'th' same way; an one
morning shoo' wor neighding th' dooaf, when Joa says, 'Mally', that isn't th' way to neighd,
my mother allus 'used to do soa;'--an' he wor baan to show' haa; Shoo made noa mooar to do,
but lauped into th' middle o'th' bowl wi' her clogs on, an' started o' traiding it wi' her
feet, an' shoo says, 'does thi mother do soa?' After that, he let her have it mooastly to her
own way, an' they seem to get on varry weel amang it nah--an' if he keeps steady they're putting
it together nicely. An' what have yo fresh, Tommy?"

"Nay, nowt 'at means ought aw think, Dick--but aw'd like to been pooisened t'other wick, but
as luck let, aw wor noa war."

"Pooisened! Tommy, nay, surelee nut."

"Yos, but aw had--tha sees aw live at th' Ee'Gurnard, an' aw'd just been into th' mistal wi'
young maister William, an' he'd been holding th' canel for me whol aw siled th' milk, an' he
wor full ov his marlocks an' bluzzed th' canel up mi nooas an' put it aght,--he's a shocker."

"Waw, Tommy, yo wodn't be pooisened wi' a canel, aw'll niver believe?"

"Noa, but as aw wor telling thi, aw'd been i'th' mistal, an' aw went into th' kitchen for a
bit o' summat to ait. Aw saw some fat o'th' ooven top in a pot, soa aw gate some breead an'
ait it up. Aw thowt it wor fearful gooid an' savored summat aw'd niver had afoor; but just
when aw'd finished it, one o'th' young mistresses come daan an' axed me what aw'd done wi'
what wor i'th' pot? Soa aw tell'd her aw'd etten it. Etten it!!' shoo skriked. 'Etten it!!
Why,' shoo says, 'yo'll be pooisened, Tommy, its pumatum!' Well, aw says, 'pumatum or net,
aw've etten it,'--an' away shoo ran an' browt th' maister an' th' mistress, an' all t'other
fowk i'th' haase, an' rarely they laffed tha minds; but maister made me a glass o' rum to settle
it, an' aw felt noa mooar on it."

"Well," said Dick, "tha mayn't feel it nah, but aw shouldn't be capped if thi inside wor to
grow full o' ringlets."

"Niver heed that, they'll keep mi belly warm," said Tommy, "but th' bacca's done, soa aw mun
be making mi way shorter. Gooid day, Dick."

"Gooid day, Tommy. Aw hope tha'll have a fine day for thi walk."

"Eea, eea, aw hope aw shall, but if it rains aw sholl'n't melt."

"Nooah, but its rayther coolish."

"It'll be warmer as it gets ooater, Dick. Gooid day."

And thus the two friends parted; each smiling at the quaint humor of the other;--the one to
climb seven miles of rough and heavy road to get his toe nails cut, and the other to pay an
early visit to his son, and rest his limbs, which by six days of willing toil had earned a
Sabbath's rest. He walked slowly, musing as he went, and every now and again making audible
the current of his thoughts.

"Its monny a long year sin aw saw owd Tommy before, an' it may be monny a long year before
aw see his face agean; aw think owd Time must use him wi' a gentler hand nor he uses me. Aw
remember th' first time aw saw him, he wor coming past th' churn milk Joan, wi' a lump o' parkin
in his hand as big as awr ooven top; an' that wor th' day 'at Jenny an' me wor wed. It seems
like a dream to me nah. Poor Jenny!--if there's a better place, tha'rt nooan soa far off thear!"
And then he paused to wipe the heavy drops from off his cheeks. "Aw thowt aw'd getten ower
this sooart o' thing, nah he sed, but aw believe aw niver shall. Its just five year come Easter
sin aw laid her low, an awve niver been able to aford a grave stooan for her yet, but aw can
find that bit o' rising graand withaat a mark, an prize it nooan the less. But its noa gooid
freating abaght things we cannot help. Aw'll have another reek or two an' goa an' see awr Joa."
So filling his little black clay pipe with the fragrant weed (which for convenience he carried
loose in his waistcoat pocket), he puffed his cloud of incense in the air and hastened on to
gain his journey's end. A walk of a few minutes brought him to the door of a low whitewashed
farm-house, around which the cans were reared, ready to be filled with the morning's milk.
He ventured in, (first carefully removing all the mire from his shoes, lest he should soil
the nicely sanded floor,) and drawing up the old arm chair which shone like polished ebony,--he
looked around the strange apartment. "Its a queer fancy (he said at last) at Mally should be
soa fond o' pots,--what ther's mooar here nor what ud start a shop; it saves th' expense of
slapdashing onyway." And he was right, for, from floor, to ceiling, and along the old oak beams,
appeared one medley of crockery--pots of all sizes--cups and plates of all shapes and patterns
were hung or reared against the wall until it was impossible to find another place where one
might be displayed; and on the mantle shelf, a long array of china images of fortune-telling
gipsies, guarded at each end by what was supposed to represent a dog--they might resemble dogs,
but surely such a breed exists not now, for if there was a point about them to recommend, it
was what Mally often said, "They ait nowt." In a short time both Joe and Mally made their apperance--health
bloom on their cheeks, and with a hearty welcome prepared the morning's meal. A clean white
cloth spread on as clean a table, the requisite pots, the fresh churned butter, and the wheaten
bread was all that was displayed to tempt them to the meal; but it was all that was required,
for appetite gave relish to the plain repast, and many a wealthy man in stately rooms, with
every luxury around, might well have envied them their simple fare, sweetened by labor, and
so well enjoyed--whilst savory meats, of which they never knew, in vain invited him whose satiated
tastes loathed every dish. But the old farmer did not seem at ease, and when the meal was over--after
a short conversation, he bade them both good day, and turned his steps towards his lonely home.
Perhaps it was the son who called up in the old man's mind some thoughts of former days--or
perhaps the train of thought he had indulged in previously might have laid a load of gloom
upon him; but, be it as it may, he seemed inclined to spend the day under his own roof tree.

The winter came and spread its spotless snows o'er hills and dales; the wild winds wailed;
the woodman's axe echoed amidst the woods; the song birds fled; the dauntless redbreast twittered
on the window sills; the cawing rooks wended their weary way in solemn flight. The spring again,
like a young bashful maid, came smiling upon old Winter's track; the field's looked gay again;
and trees seemed vieing which could first be drest in verdant green. The Summer followed on,
the sun shone o'er the fields of ripening grass; the mowers scythe was dipped in fragrant dews,
and Flora bounteously bestowed her favorite flowers. Autumn succeeded, and once more the' eye
was gladdened with the bearded grain, waving in golden splendour in the breeze;--again the
luscious fruits are tempting one to pluck; and soon again the year,--weary with its labors,
prepares to sleep, and desolation reigns.

'Tis Sunday morning, and the sun looks down through murky mists;--the ground is slightly hardened
with the nipping frost; here and there some hardy flower endeavours to look gay:--the tolling
bell rings out its morning call, and straggling groups wend their way to worship in the village
church. But on the hill, which rises high above, was stood a man in deep and earnest thought.
One could scarcely have believed that the pale, aged looking man, who dressed in sombre black
was standing and looking over the quiet scene, was the stalwart farmer, who just one year before
was holding converse with old Tommy;--but he begins to speak.

"Its just twelve months to day," he said, "sin aw wor talking to him o' this varry spot, an
nah he's gooan, an awm left to attend his funeral: ther's nowt to feel sorry for 'at aw know
on, but when an owd face is noa mooar, 'at one's been used to see--it tells a tale 'at's easy
understood;--it leaves a gap i'th' world 'at's never shut--it bids us to prepare an reckon
up awr life to see if all's as we could like it to be,--an' use what time's left to square
accounts,--soa's when we're called to 'liver up, we may be ready. Jenny wor ready, an soa wor
Tommy. It isn't ivery man yo meet i'th world 'at's honest."

It Mud ha' been War.

If iver onybody had th' luck to get off th' wrang side o'th' bed ivery mornin, an' to allus
be gettin into scrapes all th' day long, it 'wor Jack throo' th' Jumpels. It seemed as if some
evil genius wor allus abaat makkin spooart on him. If he gate mezzured for a suit o' clooas,
th' tailor wor sure to tak th' length ov his coit sleeves for his britches slops, or else mak
'em after another mezzur altogether; awther soa mich too big wol he luk'd like a wanderin bedtick
seekin th' flocks, or else soa mich too little wol he used to send his arm's an' legs soa far
throo, till yo'd fancy he'd niver be able to get 'em back. But wi' all his bad luck, an' i'
spite o' all th' scrapes he gate into, he wor a varry gooid-hearted chap, an' iverybody 'at
knew him gave him a gooid word. He went to see a hont o' his one day, an' he'd donned his best
duds, an' he couldn't help thinkin as he wor gooin whether be should be able to keep aght ov
a mess or net, an' as he knew his hont wor a varry particlar body, he detarmined to do his
varry best. When he gate to th' door he saw' at shoo'd nobbut just scarr'd th' steps, an' he
luk'd at his feet an' thowt it wod be a pity to put sich mucky booits on to sich nice wark,
soa he went raand to th' back yard; but when he gate thear th' door wor fesand, soa he thowt
th' best plan wod be to climb over th' wall, for as it wor th' middle o'th' day, an' all th'
fowk i'th' tother haases could see what wor gooin' on, he knew shoo'd niver forgive him for
callin her aght if shoo didn't happen to be weshed an' tidied; soa up he climbed, an' as it
wor twice as deep o'th' tother side he worn't disappointed to see a big tub just standin nicely
ready to step on to; soa ovver he jumpt, an' as might be expected, th' top gave way, an' he
varry sooin fan hissen up to th' middle i' pig-mait. But he nawther stamped nor sware nor made
a din like mooast fowk wod ha' done--for he'd getten soa use to messes o' one sooart an' another
wol he'd begun to tak 'em as a matter o' cooarse.

"Well, here's another bit o' my luk," he sed; "this is another mullock aw've getten into, soa
aw mun get aght on it someway; it's noa use freeatin' abaat what cannot be helped, an' ther's
one consolation, it mud ha' been war." Just as he wor scramlin' aght, his hont coom to see
what wor to do, but shoo didn't fly into a pashon as yo might fancy. "Hallo, Jack!" shoo says,
"aw thowt it must be thee; tha's dropt in for it another time, has ta?"

"Eea, aw reckon aw have, but if aw havn't spoilt th' swill aw dooant care."

"Oh, aw'll forgie thi that, lad; tha's'made a nice pictur o' thisen, reight enuff; aw could
just like thi fottagraff takkin nah, but come thi ways in."

"Nay, hont aw'll nooan come in i' this state; aw'll call agean some other day, for awst mak
nowt but muck."

"Niver heed th' muck; come thi ways in, for tha lukes like a hauf-draand ratten; tha'll catch
thi deeath o' cold if tha hasn't summat warm. Come in an doff them clooas, an' aw'll see if
aw connot find some o' thi uncles 'at'll fit thi wol thine's fit to put on agean. Aw niver
did see sich a mess i' all my life. Th' idea ov a chap fallin' up to' th' middle in a swill-tub!"

"Why, its net varry nice, reight enuff, but it mud ha' been war, hont."

"Aw wonder ha," shoo sed.

"Why, if aw'd gooan ovver th' heead."

"Well, that wodn't ha' made, things ony better, truly; but th' next time 'at tha'rt comin'
ovver that way just let me know, an' aw'll have that tub aght o'th' gate. Goa thi ways into
th' chamer an' change them stinkin' things, an' then come an' sit thi daan an' let's tawk to
thi a bit, an' see if aw can get ony sense aght on thi, for aw'm sure nubdy can put ony in."

"All serene," sed Jack, an he went an' changed his clooas, an' when he'd getten donned afresh
he coom daan stairs an' sat daan i'th' arm-cheer beside th' fire. "Yea-a-aw! yea-a-aw!" went
summat, an' up he sprang as if th' cheer-bottom wor redwoot. "A'a, tha gurt gaumless fooil!"
sed his hont, "couldn't ta see a cat an' three kittens? Aw do believe tha's killed 'em ivery
one! Poor little things!" Nay, nay, aw niver did see sich a thing i' all my life! tha's killed
'em all three, an' it's a wonder tha hasn't killed th' old cat an' all. Dear-a-me, aw did intend
draandin 'em to-morn, an' to think 'at they should be squeezed to deeath this way, Aw shalln't
get ovver it for monny a day."

"Well, aw'm varry sooary, hont; but aw niver saw' em, iw'm sure. Whoiver expected to find a
cat an' three kittens in a arm-cheer? But let's be thankful, for it mud ha' been war."

"Nay, net it! it couldn't ha' been war nor it is: tha's killed em, an' tha couldn't do ony
moor if tha'd to try." "Well, but aw mud ha' killed th' old cat as weel, yo know."

"What does ta say? Killed awr Tibby? Tha'd better keep thi heels this rooad as long as iver
tha lives nor think o' sich a thing, for aw browt her up wi a spooin throo being blind, an'
aw wodn't swap her for all th' cats i'th' world. An' if it had been anybody else nor thee 'at
had done this, they'd ha' heeard a bit o' my tongue, aw con tell thi; but, haiver, it is as
it is, soa sit thi daan. Tha's noa need to luk soa jaylus, mun, ther's nowt under thi nah but
a wish in; tha luks as white as a gooast; aw expect tha's getten thi deeath o' cold, but aw'll
get thi a sup o' whiskey, an' see if that'll warm thi a bit." 

About an hour after starting they came upon a singular monument of Druidical times, consisting
of sixty huge stones arranged in a circular form, with an entrance at the northeast, while
a single rock or large stone, the largest of all, stood apart from the circle, as if looking
down into the valley beneath.[xix]

"What can be the origin of this circle?" said Alfred.

"It belongs to the old days of heathenesse; before the Welsh were
conquered by the Romans, perhaps before our Blessed Lord came into
the world, these stones were placed as you now see them," replied
Father Cuthbert.

"What purpose could they serve?"

"For their devil worship, I suppose; you see those five stones which
stand at some little distance?"

"They are the Five Whispering Knights," said Oswy.

"They are the remains of a cromlech or altar whereon they offered their sons and daughters unto
devils, and shed innocent blood, wherefore the Lord brought the Romans
upon them."

"But the Romans were idolatrous, too."

"Yet their religion was milder than the one it superseded. Jupiter required no human sacrifices;
and even otherwise, God has said that the wicked man is often His sword to avenge Him of His
adversaries."

"Oswy looks as if he had a tale to tell."

"Speak out, Oswy, and let us all hear," said the good father.

"Well, then," said Oswy, "these were not once stones at all, but living men--a king, five knights,
and sixty soldiers--who came to take Long Compton, the town down
there, in the valley; but it so happened that a great enchanter dwelt
there, and being out that morning he saw them coming, muttered his
spells, and while the king--that stone yonder-- was in front looking
down on his prey, the five knights all whispering together, and the
sixty soldiers behind in a circle, they were all suddenly changed
into stone."

They all laughed heartily at this, and leaving the Rholdrwyg Stones,
turned aside to the hospitable hall where they ought to have spent
the previous night.

So delighted was the Thane of Rholdrwyg or Rollrich to receive his
guests that he detained them almost by force all that day, and it
was only on the morrow that he permitted them to continue their journey.

They

joined the Foss Way again after a few miles at Stow on the Wold; the road was so good that they
succeeded in reaching Cirencester, the ancient Corinium, that night,
a distance of nearly thirty miles.

Here they found a considerable population, for the town had been
one of great importance, and was still one of the chief cities of
southern Mercia, full of the remains of her departed Roman greatness,
with shattered column and shapely arch yet diversifying the thatched
hovels of the Mercians.

Two more days brought them to Bath, but the old Roman city had been
utterly destroyed, and long subsequently the English town had been
founded upon its site, so that there seemed no identity between Bath
and Aqua Solis, such as prevailed between Cirencester and Corinium.

One day's journey from Bath brought them at eventide within an easy day of Glastonbury, so that
they paused in their journey for the last time at a well-known hostelry,
chiefly occupied by pilgrims bound for Glastonbury, for the morrow
was a high festival, or rather the commencement of one, and Dunstan
was expected to conduct the ceremonies in person.

So crowded was the hostelry that Alfred and his revered tutor could
only obtain a small chamber for their private accommodation, while
their servants were forced to content themselves with such share of
the straw of the outbuildings as they could obtain, in company with
many others.

It was still early when they stopped at the inn, for one of their horses, which they had purchased
by the way, had broken down so completely that they could not well proceed, and they were
about to enter a dark and dangerous forest, full of ravenous bears and wolves, which had already
cast its shade upon their path.

But this was not an uncommon feature in English travelling of that century, when there were
no horses to be hired at the inns, and travellers could only purchase the animals they needed
(if there were any to be sold); the forest, too, was reported to be the haunt of freebooters, and
men dared to affirm that they were encouraged by the king to prey upon the fraternity at Glastonbury.

Still
the dangers of the forest did not deter Alfred, who dearly loved woodland scenery and sport,
from strolling therein when their hasty meal had been despatched, weary of the continuous objurgations
and smalltalk of the crowded inn.

He had wandered some distance, lost in thought, when all at once he
started in some surprise, for the spot on which he was seemed familiar
to him, although he had never been in Wessex before.

Yes, he certainly knew the glade, with the fine beech trees surrounding it: where could he have
seen it before? All at once he remembered his dream in the ruined temple, and started to discover
the secret foreknowledge he had thus possessed.

He wandered up and down the glade till it became dusk, and then shook
off the thoughts to which he had been a prey, and started to return
to the inn, when, to his dismay, he found he had forgotten in which
direction it lay.

While seeking to find the path by which he had entered the glade,
he suddenly noticed a beaten track between two huge rocks, which seemed
to point in the direction he had come, and yet which he recognised
as the path he had been bidden to follow in his dream.

He hesitated not, but committed himself to it, while darkness seemed
to increase each moment.

He was beginning to fear the dangers of a night in the woods, when he was startled by a sound
as of many low voices, and at the same moment became conscious that
a light was tinging with red the upper branches of the trees at no
little distance, as if proceeding from some fire, hidden by the formation
of the ground.

At first he thought that he was in the neighbourhood of outlaws, and tried to retire, but, as in
his dream, he felt so strong an impulse to discover the party whom
the woods concealed that he persevered.

Suddenly he stopped short, for he had come to the edge of a kind of
natural amphitheatre, a deep hollow in the earth, the sides of which
were covered with bushes and trees, while the area at the bottom might
perhaps have covered a hundred square yards, and was clothed with
verdant turf.

Not one, but several fires were burning, and around them were reclining
small groups of armed men, while some were walking about chatting
with each other.

Alfred gazed in much surprise, for the party did not at all realise his conception of a body
of freebooters or robbers; they all seemed to wear the same uniform,
and to resemble each other in their accoutrements and characteristics;
they rather resembled, in short, a detachment of regular forces than
a body of men whom chance might have thrown together, or the fortune
of predatory war.

While he gazed upon them, two of their number, whose attire was rich and costly, and who seemed
to be of higher rank than the rest, perhaps their officers, attracted
his attention as they walked near the spot where, clinging to a tree,
he overlooked the encampment from above.

One of them was a tall, dark warrior, whose whole demeanour was that of the professional soldier,
whose dress was plain yet rich, and who might easily be guessed to
be the commander of the party.

He was talking earnestly, but in a subdued tone, to his younger companion, whom he seemed to be
labouring to convince of the propriety of some course of action.

Alfred watched them eagerly; the form of the younger--for so he appeared by his slender frame--seemed
familiar to him, and when at last they turned their faces and walked towards him, the light of
a neighbouring fire showed him the face of his brother Elfric.

"My dream!" he mentally exclaimed.

They were evidently talking about some very important subject, and it was also evident that the
objections of the younger, whatever they might be, were becoming
rapidly overruled, when, as chance, if it were chance, would have
it, they paused in their circuit of the little camp just beneath the
tree where Alfred was posted.

"You see," said the elder, "that our course is clear, so definitely clear that we have but to
do our duty to the king, while we avenge a thousand little insults we have ourselves received from
this insolent monk--such insults as warriors wash out with blood."

"Yet he is a churchman, and it would be called utter sacrilege."

"Sacrilege! is a churchman's blood redder than that of layman, and is he not doomed as a traitor
by a judgment as righteous as ever English law pronounced! did he
not keep Edwy from his throne during the lifetime of the usurper Edred!"

"That

was the sentence of the Witan, and you served Edred."

"I did not owe the allegiance of an Englishman to either, being of
foreign birth, and so was no traitor; as for the Witan, it is well
known Dunstan influenced their decision at the death of the royal
Edmund."

"I never heard the assertion before."

"You have many things still to learn; you are but young as yet. But let it pass. Does not his
conduct to Queen Elgiva merit death!"

"I think it does. But still not without sentence of law."

   
      "That sentence has been in fact
   pronounced, for in such cases as these,
      where the subject is too powerful
   for the direct action of the law to
      reach him, the decision
   of the king and council must pass
      for law, and they have decided
   that Dunstan must die, and have left
      the execution of the sentence--to
   us."
      
   He did not add that the council in question
      consisted of the giddy young
   nobles who had surrounded Edwy from the first,
      aided by a few hoary sinners whose lives of plunder and rapine had
given them a personal hatred of the Church.

Elfric heaved a sigh, and said:

"If so, I suppose I must obey; but I wish I had not been sent on the expedition."

"It is to test your loyalty."

"Then it shall be proved. I have no personal motives of gratitude towards Dunstan."

"Rather the contrary."

"Rather the contrary, as you say. But what sound was that? Surely something stirred the bush!"

"A
rabbit or a hare. You are becoming fanciful and timid. Well, you will remember that tomorrow
there must be no timidity, no yielding to what some would call conscience,
but wise men the scruples of superstition.

We shall not reach the monastery till dark, most of the visitors will then have quitted it, and
we shall take the old fox in a trap."

"You will not slay him in cold blood!"

"No. I shall bid him follow me to the king, and if he and his resist, as probably they will, then
their blood be on their own heads. But surely--"

At that moment a large stone, which Alfred had most inopportunely
dislodged, rolled down the bank, and made Elfric, who was in its path,
leap aside.

Alfred, whose foot had rested upon it, slipped, and for a moment seemed in danger of following
the stone, but he had happily time to grasp the tree securely, and by its aid he drew himself
back and darted into the wood.

Luckily there was moonlight enough to guide him by the track he had hitherto followed, and he
ran forward, dreading nothing so much as to fall into the hands of
the friends of his brother, and trusting that he might prevent the
execution of the foul deed he had heard meditated.

He ran for a long distance before he paused, when he became aware that pursuers were on his
track. Luckily his life had been spent so much in the open air that he was capable of great
exertion, and could run well. So he resumed his course, although he knew not where it would
lead him, and soon had the pleasure of feeling that he was distancing his pursuers. Yet every
time he ran over a piece of smooth turf he fancied he could hear
them in his rear, and it was with the greatest feeling of relief that
he suddenly emerged from the wood upon the Foss Way, and saw the lights
of the hostelry at no great distance below him.

His pursuers did not follow him farther, probably unwilling to betray their presence to the
neighbourhood, and perhaps utterly unconscious that the intruder
upon their peace was possessed of any dangerous secrets, or other
than some rustic woodman belated on his homeward way, who would be
unable in any degree to interfere with them or to guess their designs.

But it was not till the ardour of his flight had abated, that Alfred could fully realise that
his unhappy brother was committed to a deed of scandalous atrocity, and the discovery was hard
for him to bear.

The strong impression which his dream had made upon him--an impression that he was to be the
means of saving his brother from some great sin-- came upon him now with greater force than ever,
and was of great comfort. The identity of the scenery he had seen in dreamland with the actual scenery he
had gone through, made him feel that he was under the special guidance of Providence.

Returning to the inn he sought Father Cuthbert, and found him somewhat
uneasy at his long absence, and to him he communicated all that he
had seen and heard.

The good father was a man of sound sense but of much affection, and
at first he could not credit that the boy he had loved so well, Elfric
of Aescendune, should have grown to be the associate of murderers,
for such only could either he or Alfred style the agents of Edwy's
wrath.

But, once fully convinced, he was equal to the emergency.

"We will not start at once, we should but break down on the road, and defeat our own object.
We must rest quietly, and sleep soundly if possible, and start with the earliest dawn. We
shall reach Glastonbury by midday, and be able to warn the holy abbot of his danger in good time."

So
Alfred was forced to curb his impatience and to try to sleep soundly. Father Cuthbert soon gave
good assurance that he was asleep; but the noisy manner in which the assurance was given banished
sleep from the eyelids of his anxious pupil. At length he yielded to weariness both of mind and
body, and the overwrought brain was still.

He was but little refreshed when he heard Father Cuthbert's morning
salutation, "Benedicamus Domino," and could hardly stammer out the
customary reply, "Deo gratias."

Every one rose early in those days, and the timely departure of the party from Aescendune excited
no special comment.

Hundreds of pilgrims were on the road, and Alfred expressed his conviction
that there would be force enough at Glastonbury to protect Dunstan,
to which Father Cuthbert replied--"If he would accept such protection."

On

former days their journey had been frequently impeded by broken bridges and dangerous fords; but
as they drew near Glastonbury the presence of a mighty civilising
power became manifest.

The fields were well tilled, for the possessions for miles around the abbey were let to tenant
farmers by the monks, who had first reclaimed them from the wilderness. The farm houses and
the abodes of the poor were better constructed, and the streams were all bridged over, while
the old Roman road was kept in tolerable repair.

A short distance before they reached the city, the pilgrims, who were a space in advance of the
party, came in sight of the towers of the monastery, whereupon they all paused for one moment,
and raised the solemn strain then but recently composed--

I. Founded on the Rock of Ages, Salem, city of the blest, Built of living stones most precious,
Vision of eternal rest, Angel hands, in love attending, Thee in bridal robes invest. II. Down
from God all new descending Thee our joyful eyes behold, Like a bride
adorned for spousals, Decked with radiant wealth untold; All thy streets
and walls are fashioned, All are bright with purest gold!

III. Gates of pearl, for ever open, Welcome there the loved, the lost; Ransomed by their Saviour's
merits; This the price their freedom cost: City of eternal refuge,
Haven of the tempest-tost.

IV. Fierce the blow, and firm the pressure, Which hath polished thus each stone: Well the Mastermind
hath fitted To his chosen place each one. When the Architect takes reck'ning, He will count the
work His Own.

V. Glory be to God, the Father; Glory to th' Eternal Son; Glory to
the Blessed Spirit: One in Three, and Three in One.

Glory, honour, might, dominion, While eternal ages run.

Amen.[xx]

The grand strains seemed to bring assurance of Divine aid to Alfred,
and he could but imitate Father Cuthbert, who lifted up his stentorian
voice and thundered out in chorus, as they drew near the pilgrims.

Here they left the Foss Way for the side road leading to the monastery, now only a short distance
from them.

CHAPTER XI. THE FLIGHT OF DUNSTAN.

It was the day of St. Alban, the protomartyr of England, and the saint was greatly honoured at Glastonbury,
where, as we have seen, Dunstan was in residence, and, as a natural
consequence, every department of the monastic life was quickened by
his presence.

The abbey was full of monks who had professed the Benedictine rule, and having but recently
been rebuilt, it possessed many improvements hardly yet introduced into English architecture
in general. The greater part of the building was of stone, and it was not, in its general features,
unlike some of the older colleges at Oxford or Cambridge, although the order of the architecture
was, of course, exclusively that of the Saxon period, characterised by the heavy and massive,
yet imposing, circular arch.

But upon the church or abbey chapel all the skill of the architect
had been concentrated, and it seemed worthy alike of its founder and
of its object. Seen upon the morning in question, when the bright
summer sun filled every corner with gladsome light, just as the long
procession of white-robed priests, and monks in their sombre garb,
with their hoods thrown back, were entering for high mass, and the
choral psalm arose, it was peculiarly imposing.

The procession had
not long entered the church, when the party of pilgrims we have described,
closely followed by our friends from Aescendune, entered the quadrangle,
and crossed it to the great porch of the church. It was with the greatest
difficulty they could enter, for the whole floor of the huge building
was crowded with kneeling worshippers. The portion of Scripture appointed
for the epistle was being chanted, and the words struck Alfred's ears
as he entered--"He pleased God, and was beloved of Him, so that, living
among sinners, he was translated."

The words seemed to come upon
him with special application to the danger the great abbot was in,
and the thought that the martyr's day might be stained by a deed of
blood, or, as some might say, hallowed by another martyrdom, added
to his agitation.

And now he had gained a position where the high
altar was in full view, illuminated by its countless tapers, and fragrant
with aromatic odours. There, in the centre of the altar, his face
turned to the people as the sequence was ended, and the chanting of
the gospel from the rood loft began, stood the celebrant, and Alfred
gazed for the first time upon the face of Dunstan, brought out in
strong relief by the glare of the artificial light.

He strove earnestly
to concentrate his thoughts upon the sacred words.

He could not but
feel the strange coincidence that words such as these should come
to strengthen him, when he felt he had most need to shelter himself
under the shadow of the Cross. The service proceeded, the creed, sanctus,
and other choral portions being sung by the whole monastic body in
sonorous strains; and for a time Alfred was able to make a virtue
of necessity, and to give himself wholly to the solemnity; but when
it was over and the procession left the church, he sought an immediate
interview with the abbot, in company with Father Cuthbert.

Dunstan
had removed his sacerdotal garments, and had returned to his own cell,
which only differed in size from the cells of his brethren. The furniture
was studiously plain: hard wooden chairs; an unvarnished table; a
wooden bedstead, with no bed, and only a loose coverlet of sackcloth;
the walls uncovered by tapestry; the floor unfurnished with rushes;--such
was the chamber of the man who had ruled England, and still exercised
the most unbounded spiritual influence in the land. Aw'd rayther be stranspoorted to
Botny Bay nor be as aw am. Ther's hardly a minnit but what ther's somdy o' th' doorstun!"

Betty coom in smilin' all over her face. "Nah!" shoo says, "aw've managed, an' aw've come ta
see if tha'll goa wi' us, for Susy's baan up th' street to buy a staylace, an' aw thowt aw'd
just goa an' get th' stink blown off, for aw've cawered i' this yard woll aw'm feear'd awst
grow maald. Put thi bonnet on, an' goa wi' us, we'st be back i' gooid time."

"Aw could like to goa, but aw've soa mich to do woll aw hardly dar, for woll aw wor talkin'
to thee an' Susy this fornooin, th' fire went aght, an' when Dick an' th' childer coom hooam
ther wornt a bit o' dinner for 'em."

"Well, awm capt, 'at tha'll bother wi' cookin' 'em dinners. Aw allus let awrs tak' ther jock
wi' em, it saves a deal o' trouble, an' aw say a woman's wark enuff, shoo haddles owt shoo
gets, an' if we dunnot luk aght for ussen noabody else will for us. But please thisen, if tha
doesn't tha darn't."

"Oh! as to that, aw dar goa, but aw've nowt to goa for, an' lots o' wark at hooam. Aw think
aw'd rayther nut."

"Well, tha'll get noa better on for cawering ith' haase like a moldwarp. But aw mun goa, for
Susy's waitin'." Away went Betty, an' Zantippa ommost rued 'at shoo hadn't goan too: but it
wor nobbut for a minit, for shoo teed her apron string a bit tighter, tuck'd up her sleeves,
pooled in a long breath, an' as shoo said, "began ta make a sidashun."

Nah, if iver yo' want a chap to study a bit, an' resolve to mend his ways, let him be quiet;
but if iver yo' want a woman to start o' thinkin' an' resolvin', let her have summat to do.
If a woman sits quiet shoo begins to mump. Aw niver hardly met a woman 'at could sit daan quietly
for five minits withaat sighin' two or three times; they think an' think, an' sigh, an' shake
ther heeads, an' if they're let alooan they manage to wark thersen inta a bad temper abaght
summat, but what that is, aw've never met one 'at could tell. Zantippa didn't sit daan an'
mump, but up stairs shoo went an' made th' beds, an' a rare shakin' they gat, for shoo wor
just ful o' summat an' shoo mud vent her feelins someway.

Women have a deal better way o'managin' that sooart o' thing nor what men have. Ther are times
when we're all brimful o' summat, th' steam's up, an' if we connot find a safety valve we shall
brust. Nah, a woman drives up to th' elbows i'th' weshin' tub, or rives all th' carpets up,
or pools all th' pots aght o'th' cubboard an' puts 'em back agean. Shoo lets her tongue have
full liberty, an' what wi' talkin', an' sweatin', an' scrub bin', an' brushin', shoo finds
hersen reight daan tired, an' after a bit ov a wesh an' snoddenin' her toppin', shoo sits daan
to her knittin' or sewin', as cooil as a cucumber, an' as ful o' gooid natur as an egg's ful
o' mait, an' her een sparkle wi' pleasure, like dewdrops sparkle on a rose in a summer's mornin'.
But wi' a chap it's different, nine times aght o' ten he flies to th' ale pot, or else he begins
growlin' at hooam. "Th' tea's hot," or "th' muffin's cold," or "th' butter's wor nor cart grease."
"Th' childer's noisy," or "th' wife's quiet," an' noa matter what's done for him it's all wrang.
Sometimes bi th' way ov a change, he'll pawse th' table ower, an' braik as mony pots as it'll
tak a gooid part ov a week's wage to replace, an' at last, after makin' iverybody abaght him
miserable, he'll goa to bed lukin' as black as a mule an' sleep woll mornin', when (unless
he's ova bad sooart) he'll feel reight daan shamed ov hissel, an' set to wark to put things
reight agean. Nah, Zantippa wor just i' one o' these moods; an' shoo made th' beds, coom daan
stairs, an' weshed all th' pots, scaled th' fire an' took the ass aght, gave th' hearthstun
another dooas o' idleback, scattered a bit ov fresh sand o' th' floor, an' after weshin' hersen,
an' donin' a clean print dress, shoo laid th' table ready for th' teah, gate th' kettle onto
th' rib, an' sat daan wi' her bag ful o' worset an' a heap o' stockins, an', as shoo luk'd
raand shoo felt as pleased as Punch to see what a difference shoo'd been able ta mak in an
haar or two. "Aw'm nooan sooary 'at aw stopt at hooam," shoo said to hersen. "Aw know Dick'll
be suited when he sees all fettled up, an' if aw get theas stockins done ta neet the'll be
aght o'th gate. Aw wonder ha it wor 'at he tuk things sooa quietly this nooin; aw dooant think
it's reight when a chap's been work in' iver sin six o'clock ov a mornin' for him to come hooam
an' find noa dinner ready. Reight enuff, a woman's plenty to do to follow her haase, an' cook,
an' mend, but if ther wor noa wage comin' in, ther'd be less cookin' an' moor mendin', aw've
a noation. Aw've made up mi mind woll aw've been sidin' up 'at aw'll nut waste mi time as aw
have done, talkin' an' gossippin', for ther's noa gooid comes on it, an' altho' aw want to
keep thick wi' mi neighbors, aw'm determined aw'll chop that sooart o' thing off at once; for
my mother used to tell me, 'If ther were noa listeners, ther'd be noa taletellers;' an' th'
time 'at one spends is war nor wasted, for it oft leads ta 'fendin' an' provin', for them 'at
come an' tell yo summat abaght somdy else will just as sooin tell somdy else summat abaght
yo. An' luk what scrapes one gets into wi' it. Nah, aw made Dick believe 'at th' chimley smookd,
that wor a lie to say th' least on it, an' he'll be sure ta noatice 'at it doesn't smook ta-neet,
but if he names it aw'll tell th' truth, for, aw'm sure noa gooid comes o' lying."

When Zantippa had just made this resolve, th' door opened, an' Dick au' three childer coom
in throo th' miln. He saw th' difference in a minnit. "Wipe them clogs," he said as th' childer
wor walkin' in. "Tha's been fettlin' a bit, lass, aw think. Are ta baan to ax some o'th' neighbors
to ther drinkin'?"

"Noa!" shoo says, "aw'm baan to ax noabody but thee an' th' childer. Does ta want me to ax somdy?"

"Nay, nooan soa! Aw'd as gooid as promised to goa as far as 'Th' Cock' ta neet, to talk ovver
this bit ov a doo, but aw think aw'll stop at hooam, what says ta?" Zantippa smiled, nay even
blushed, shoo knew what he ment an' shoo felt pleased. It wor a bit ov a compliment, an' paid
her for all her trouble.

"Please thisen," shoo said, as shoo poured aght a cup o' teah for him, an' lifted a pile o'
tooast aght o' th' oven, "but aw think th'rt as weel at hooam."

"Well, an' aw think aw'm better," he said, as he luk'd raand, "aw think th' chimley doesn't
smook as ill as it did, does it?"

Shoo hung her heead, an' stooped ta pick a pin off th' floor, but shoo couldn't find one, an'
when shoo luk'd up ther een met. Shoo didn't spaik, nor moor did he; it worn't needed. It wor
a long time sin they'd sich a comfortable teah, an' when they'd done they sat some time at
th' table i' silence. Ha' long they might have sat aw connot tell, hadn't th' door oppened,
an' Betty come runnin' in wi' a pot to beg a sup o' hot watter, for shoo said "Her chap had
coom hooam, an' shoo'd been rayther longer nor shoo expected, an' he wor playin' th' varry
hangment for his drinkin'."

Shoo gate her hot water, an' went away. Dick luk'd at his wife, an' takkin' howd ov her hand,
said, "Aw'm glad 'at tha hasn't to goa seekin' hot water, an' aw hooap tha niver may have."

"Aw hooap nut," shoo said, an' sat daan evidently varry ill set ta see her stockins. Nah, what
a little con make fowk happy or miserable. Dick wor as content as a king, becoss all th' haas
wor tidy. He saw at somdy had been tryin' to mak' him comfortable; an shoo wor as delighted
as if shoo'd getten a fortin left, becoss what shoo'd done had suited him.

When th' childer had getten all put ta bed, Dick said, "Lass, aw've been thinkin' 'at aw dooant
care soa mich abaght gooin to this teadrinkin' for aw've a noation 'at we connot goa ta th'
tea withaat stoppin' an' spendin' a lot o' brass at after, an' aw've heeard thee say as thar't
fast for some flannel. Nah, if we stop at hooam an' spend th' brass o' what it is tha wants,
it'll do us moor gooid nor th' ale, what says ta?"

"Just thee please thisen, Dick. Aw had thowt o' gooin, but as tha says it's sure to cost summat,
an' awr Billy wants some new clogs, for yond tak watter varry ill, an' aw dooant know what
we could do better wi' th' brass, an' aw think we con have as comfortable a teah at hooam."

"Aw'm sure, an' moor soa, an' as tha's decided nut to goa, aw'll tell thi ov a marlock some
o'th' chaps has been playin' but tha munnat split, for it hasn't to get aght woll after th'
pairty. Tha knows Hungary at works wi' us?"

"Does ta meean him 'at once ait a pailful o' draff?"

"Th' same chap! An' he declared 'at if he gate aside o'th steaks at this doo, he'd polish th'
lot (an' aw believe he can ait owt less nor a bullock), soa some o'th chaps made it up 'at
he should have a dish to his own cheek; but they'd ta be donkey steaks--for owd Labon ('at
hawks cockles an' mussels) had let his donkey catch cold or summat, at ony rate it dee'd, an'
soa they thowt if they could get some steaks off that they'd just come in, but they knew 'at
owd Labon had rayther part wi' his heead nor let onybody mell o'th donkey, for he thowt as
mich on it as if it wor a Christian. But they determined to scheme some way to get it, soa
Joe Longfooit offered to go into th' yard where it wor, an' cut off one hinder leg an' tak
it hooam ta cook, if Sam Sniggle 'ud watch aght to see 'at noabody coom. Labon kept his donkey,
tha knows, in a place at th' top o'th long stepses, an' used ta goa raand th' back rooad wi'
it, soa one dinner time they'd watch'd Labon aght o'th' yard, (where he'd been standin' rubbin'
his een, an' strokin' his owd favourite,) an' when he'd getten nicely off they ventured to
try ther luck. Joe Longfooit went up wi' a gurt carvin' knife, an' left Sam at th' bottom to
whistle if he saw onnybody comin', an' he stood thear for a while, but he wanted a bit o' bacca,
an' ther wor sich a wind i'th' steps 'at he couldn't get a leet, soa he went across the rooad
into a doorhoil for shelter. He worn't aboon a minnit or two away, but when he coom back what
should he see but owd Labon within a few steps o'th' top. He hardly knew what ta do, but he
managed as mich wind as made a whistle, an' stood watchin' for th' next move. Joa heeard the
signal, but it wor too lat, for he couldn't get aght withaat th' owd chap seein' him, an' he'd
getten th' leg cut off ready for huggin' away, soa seizin' hold o'th' shank, he watched for
owd Labon's hat showin' aboon th' wall top, when he gave it sich a clencher wi' th' thick end
o'th' leg, woll he forced th' brewards reight onto his sholder, then he laup'd ovver th' wall
an' ran hooam wi' his prize as fast as his legs could carry him, leavin' Laban to find his
way into dayleet ageean as weel as he could. Sam met him at th' haase an' they worn't long
i' cutting some grand lukkin' steaks off, an' puttin' 'em ov a dish i'th cubboard, an' bith'
time they'd done that, th' bell rang an' they'd ta goa back ta ther wark. When Labon gate his
hat, once more onto th' top ov his heead, he went ta see his owd deead friend, an' when he
saw it ligged thear wi' nobbut three legs, he vow'd vengeance agean them 'at had done it, an'
declared 'at if iver he fan it aght, he'd mak 'em pay for it, for it wor nowt noa less nor
robbin' th' deead, an' he'd have' em tried for assasination. Joa's wife wor aght when they
took th' leg hooam, an' after they cut th' steaks off they'd hid t' other part under th' coils.
But they hadn't been gooan soa varry long when shoo coom in, an' as shoo wor gettin' th' pots
aght o'th cubbord, shoo saw this dish' ful o' steaks. "A'a!" shoo says, "it's just like yond
chap to put thease in here an' say nowt abaght it, but aw con just relish one o' thease to
my drinkin', an' aw dar say he'll want one, an' awm sure th' childer 'll do wi' a bit. We hav'nt
had as mich fleshmait i' awr haase afoor for many a wick. Fotch that gridiron, Polly! We'st
ha to do it o'th' top o'th' coil, for ther isn't fat enuff to fry it."

Shoo worn't long afoor shoo had it nicely cooked, an' the tea made, an' a thowt struck her'
at shoo'd ax Sam's wife to her tea, for shoo knew 'at they didn't oft get steak at their haase,
so Polly went an' browt Mistress Sniggle an' all th' childer to ther tea, an' as ther wor eight
on' em, they varry sooin put thersen o'th' aghtside o'th' steak. They set to wark then to get
some clean pots ready for Joa, an' sent one o'th' childer ta watch th' miln loise, ta tell
Sam ta come wi' him. When they come all wor nicely ready for' em, but ther minds worn't easy,
for ther'd been a policeman axing abaght 'em at ther wark, for Labon had seen Sam at th' bottom
o'th' steps, an' he thowt he knew summat abaght it, soa they declared they'd niver own to it
to a wick soul. As sooin as they gate in they smell'd what wor up, for Joa knew ther wor noa
mait i' th' haase else, an' his wife had no brass to buy ony. He looked at Sam, an' thear they
stooid i' th' middle o' th' floor as white as two ghosts, staring at one another, but they
darn't spaik, an' booath waited to see what t'other did.

"Come on to your drinkin'," said th' women.

"A'a! tha'rt a grand un, Joa," said his wife, "to put them steaks i' th' cubbord an' niver
say a word abaght it, an' tha knows ha fond aw am ov a bit o' steak, an' it's a bit o' nice
mait too, tho' it isn't as tender as some. We've savvor'd it, aw con tell thi, for considerin'
th' price o' mait nah, a gooid steak's hardly within th' raich o' workin' fowk."

Joa wor dumb struck, he stirred his tea, but he couldn't tak his een off th' steak. Sam rested
his head on his hand an' complained abaght bein' poorly.

"It's for want o' some gooid support, mun," said his wife, "get some o' that mait into thi.
It's made me feel a different body, awm as frisky as a young foil, an' luk at th' childer,
they're wrastlin' thear like young bullocks. Mun, it puts a bit o'th' natur o'th' beast into 'em."

But Sam declared he felt poorly, an' couldn't touch mait; but Joa couldn't spaik at all. As
he sat starin' at th' dish, old Laban went past th' door, wi' a basket o' awther arm shaatin'
aght "Cockles alive! Mussels alive, oh!" As sooin as Joa heard that he seized a fork, an' stuck
it into th' mait wi' sich a force, 'at he smashed th' dish an' pinned it fast to th' table
top. "Woa, up!" he said, "stop thee thear!"

"A'a! gaumless! tha's been having summat to sup this afternooin, aw can see," said his wife.
"Tha mud ha' thowt owd Labon wor callin o'th' steak to goa wi' him!" But poor Joa couldn't
get a word off. Drops o' sweat stood ov his foreheead as big as pays, an' he couldn't tak his
een off th' mait. "Is ther summat th' matter wi' that steak, makes thi 'at tha connot touch
it?" said his wife; "awm sure it's nicely enuff; what is ther to do wi' thi?"

"Oh, th' steak's reight enuff," said Joa, raisin' courage to spaik, "th' steaks all reight,
but aw'm nut i'th' knife an' fork line to-neet. What's that noise i'th' cellar?" he said, starting
aght ov his chear, wi' his hair ommost studden ov an end, an' his een starin', an' his teeth
girnin', like a sheepheead between a pair o' tangs!

"What noise! Does ta mean that rawtin' daan i'th' cellar?"

"Eea!"

"Oh, it's nobbut th' childer 'at's laikin, some on 'em's recknin' to be donkeys an' t'other's
drivin' 'em; they've been at it iver sin they'd ther drinkin'; it's that mait 'at's suited
'em soa, mun, woll they dunnot know what to do."

"Aw mun goa hooam," said Sam, "aw can't bide, aw'm varry poorly."

"Why yo booath luk awther poorly or summat," said his wife. "An' aw think th' sooner yo get
to bed an' th' better."

Sam an' his wife and childer went hooam, an' it wornt long afoor Joa wor burrying his heead
under th' blankets, an' tryin' to fall asleep; but he couldn't, for as sooin as he began to
dooaz off, he began dreamin' 'at he wor tryin 'to swallow a donkey an' wakkened wi' it stickin'
in his throit.

Th' next mornin' when they met ther faces luk'd moor like two dazed cakes nor owt, for they'd
hardly a mite o' color left. "We're reight in for it this time, Sam," said Joa. "Aw believe
this job 'll tell ov itsel'. Does ta think 'at it makes ony difference wi' fowk aiting donkey
beef?"

"Well, aw dooant know; but aw did once know a chap 'at wor a reglar cauf heead, an' he hardly
iver ait owt but veal, an' tha knows th' bass singer at awr church gets bacon to ommost ivery
meal, an' he grunts as ill as a pig, bi'th' heart does he;--an', awm sure, my childer's ears
luk'd longer to me this mornin', or else aw thowt soa!"

"Well, an aw'm sure my wife snoor'd i'th neet moor like a donkey rawtin nor owt else, an' th'
fust thing awr Isaac axed me this marnin' wor to buy him some panniers so as he could be a
mule. But what are we to do wi' yond t'other pairt o'th' leg?"

"Oh, we mun burry that, we'll ha' noa moor truck wi' that, an' aw think we'd better ax some
advice abaght some o' them 'at's etten th' other; for it wod be a doo if they'd to start o'
growin' tails or summat! ther's noa tellin'."

They were boath soa terrified woll they left their wark, an' they went to see an owd chap 'at's
varry skilful o' heearbs, an' they tell'd him all abaght it, an' axed him "if he thowt it 'ud
mak ony difference to them 'at had etten it?"

"Well," he said, "considerin' what sooart o' fathers they have aw dooant think it will mak
mich difference to th' childer, it hardly con, an' if th' wives get rayther unruly, yo mun
try an' bridle 'em a bit. But if yo'll tak my advice for't future, yo'll let that alooan 'at
doesn't belang to yo, for yo'll allus find ought dishonestly getten, will breed moor trouble
to yo nor what th' loss 'll mak to them yo've ta'en it throo,--soa goa hooam, an' bear i' mind
'at "Honesty is th' best policy," an' if 'owd Labon's donkey has towt yo that lesson, it hasn't
dee'd for nowt."

They went back to their wark, but someha' or other it's getten wind, an' aw fancy 'at th' doctor's
tell'd, but be that as it may, aw consider they wor reight sarved, an' aw dooant think they'll
show up at this tea-drinkin'.

"Well, aw niver heard sich a tale i' my life," said Zantippa. "An' aw should think they'll
never see a donkey withaght thinkin' on it, an' if soa it'll noa daat be for th' best. Noabody
owt to be aboon learnin' when they've a chonce, an' aw think aw've lent a lesson to-day."

"Does ta lass, an' what is it?"

"Why, 'at to mak hooam comfortable owt to be a woman's furst duty, for a clean hearth an' a
cheerful fire do a deal towards makin' a cheerful heart; for when a haase is upset a chap's
temper gets upset, an' it's a deal better to prevent a few cross words nor to try an' mak things
up agean."

"Tha'rt a gooid lass, Zantippa! God bless thi! Let's goa to bed!"

One, Two, Three.

Nah number one is onybody an' iverybody; for we're all number one to ussen. Ther's an old sayin,
an' it must be true, for ommost iverybody seems to believe it, 'at we should all remember number
one--that is, it's set daan to be iverybody's duty to do th' best they can for thersen, an'
it's becoss this doctrine is soa well acted up to, 'at maks me think 'at ther may be a bit
ov amusement an' profit i' studying abaat it at this time--yo can tak th' amusement an' let
me have th' profit. Nah, if you act up to my advice, aw think yo may be happen better nor yo
are, an' if yo dooant aw dooant think yo'l be ony war, an' that's one comfort. Ther's nowt
like startin at th' faandation ov a subject, if yo want to deal wi' it in a reight way, an'
aw intend to goa to th' rooit, an' as money is th' rooit ov all evil, an' th' number one doctrine
is i' my opinion an evil, aw shall start wi' brass. We mun awther believe money to be th' rooit
ov all evil, or else we daat th' wisdom o' him at sed it, but at th' same time my experience
taiches me at it's a varry useful thing to have i' yor pocket when yo goa to market, an' it's
a wonderful thing for stiffenin a chap's back booan. Allus remember this, at th' heigher yo
hold yor heead an' lower other fowk 'll bow theirs. Ther are exceptions to this rule, for ther
are 'at think a honest man has as mich reight to hold up his heead, even if he hasn't a penny
in his pocket, as one 'at's thaasands o' paands. Ov coorse, yo know better nor that; for a
empty heead an' a full purse can pass muster even i'th' Parliament. Then, whativer yo do, yo
mun get hold o' this brass, an' niver heed, if becoss your gettin moor nor yo want causes some
others to goa short--that's nowt to yo--yor number one an' luk to that. If yo can nobbut get
a fortune, yo'll find friends come withaat seekin. But mind whativer yo do to get yor brass
honestly-that is, get it i' some way 'at th' law cannot touch yo. Dooant knock a chap daan
an' tak it throo him, but start some sooart ov a society wi' a long name, get some offices
in a garret in a grand street, get some chap wi' a hannel to his name to be president, an'
a lot o' directors 'at nawther yo nor onybody else iver knew, pay a poor begger fourteen shillin
a week to be scratchetary, mak yorsen into th' treasurer, an' then advertise. Somdy'll be sure
to tak shares, an' as sooin as ther's ony brass to goa on wi,' vooat yor sen a salary ov two
thaasand a year,--mak sure to get it--an' then, if ther's ony claims at yo connot meet wind
up th' business. Fowk'll be sure to sympathise wi' yo, and yo'll have as mich as 'll keep yo
respectable for a bit, an' then yo can luk aght for another chonce o' turnin a honest penny.
Yor belly'll be full an' your back weel clooathed, your conscience--well, tak noa noatice o'
that,--an' if yo can get a front seeat in a chapel yo'll stand a gooid chonce o' been made
a taan caancillor or a member o'th schooil booard. This number one doctrine has another advantage,
a chap 'at follows it aght has nubdy's else interests to bother abaat; he doesn't care who
dees soa long as he lives, nor who sinks soa long as he can swim. But allus tak care net to
let other fowk know 'at yo live up to this system; for although iverybody thinks a gooid deeal
o' ther own number one, nubdy seems fond ov another's. Some even goa soa far as to call a number
one chap selfish. Well, worn't we born into th' world to be selfish? What have we nails for
if we munnot scrat? What have we teeth for but to bite? What have we een for but to look after
awr own interests? What have we ears for but to listen for iverything to us own advantage?
What have we bodies for but to serve? This is number one doctrine. Its varry popular, an' does
varry weel for this world; ther's a deal o' hansom gravestooans stand ovver once successful
number ones. What ther number is i'th' next world is moor nor aw can tell, but aw know they'll
have to start afresh, for all they iver gained they've left behund.

Fowk 'at niver loise seet o' 'number one,' are a hard workin set as a rule, but even they have
to amuse thersen a bit sometimes, an' they find it a nice change to luk after 'number two.'
To a chap o' this sooart, iverybody's 'number two,' 'at's a bit better awther i' luks, position,
or pocket. Nah if yo want ony fun o' this sooart aw'll tell yo ha to get it. Furst ov all,
find aght sombdy 'at yo fancy yore mates think moor on nor they think o' yo--watch him ivery
time yo get a chonce, an' see if yo connot pick aght a hoil in his coit. Dooant be disheartened
if yo have to luk a long time before yo can find a fault--be sure ther is one somewhear, an'
if yo can't see it at a distance, hutch cloiser up, mak a gurt fuss on him, niver say owt contrary
to what he says; if he says summat funny, laff fit to split yor sides, an' if he says owt serious,
luk solemn an' shak yor heead. Watch him carefully, an' it's a thaasand to one but some day
yo'll catch him trippin. If, when yo've fun a hoil, it's soa little as to be hardly worth noaticing,
dooant despair, wol yor clappin him on his back an' smilin in his face, yo can happen get yor
finger in, an then rive it a bit bigger. Do it gently at furst, just a little bit at a time,
and then when yo've getten a chonce, rip it as far as yo can. But be sure yo have nowt ony
moor to do with him after that. If yo see him comin, cross on t'other side o' th' rooad, niver
let on 'at yo've seen him, but as sooin as he's getten past, shak yor heead sorrowfully an'
sigh; if yo happen to have a clean hankerchy i' yor pocket, yo may tak it aght and mak believe
to wipe off a tear--niver heed if ther isn't one, fowk'll think better o' yo, an' all the war
o' him. If onybody should come an' ask yo if yo've heeard that sad tale abaat him, say. 'God
forbid at yo should hear owt war nor what yo've heeard before.' Dooant seem inclined to listen,
but when they've done, say, 'Well, well it's a thaasand pities, but if that wor th' warst it
wodn't matter mich.' He's sure to go away wi' th' noation 'at yo know summot abaat th' same
chap 'at's ten times war nor owt he's heeard, but yo've too mich gooid natur to tell it. Nah
this is all varry gooid fun for' number one;' an when yo see poor' number two' loise his shop,
or shunned, or luked shyly at wi' them at wor once his admirers, an' yo know 'at it's allowing
to yo, then yo can goa hooam an' shut yorsen up all bi yorsen, an' laff, an rejoice to yor
heart's content. But dooant be surprised if, when yo chuckle, yo should hear another chuckle
cloise to yor elbow, for haiver yo lock an' bolt th' door, yo connot keep th' devil aght. He
enjoys a bit o' fun o' this sooart as weel as yo, an' he's nobbut come to show yo ha pleased
he is. If yo dooant like his compny sarve him th' same way --remember yo're 'number one,' an
he's nobbut 'number two' to yo. Pool as long a face, an' luk as sanctimonious as yo can, an'
wheniver yo've a chonce, tell fowk to shun him an' all his works, tell 'em 'at he's prowlin
raand like a lion seekin who to make a meal on th' next. Yo needn't be mailly-maathed abaat
him, becoss he's net suppooased to have ony friends. He willn't care a button what yo say,
'coss he knows yo cannot injure his character, an' he laffs to hissen as he sees yo sighin,
an lyin, an scheamin, all for 'number one,' an he puts a mark opposite yor name to show 'at
he's noa need to luk after yo ony moor--yo're all safe--an' then he turns his attention to
some 'number twos.' It's gooid spooart, isn't it? May be yo think it's a spooart 'at's niver
entered onybody's heead but mine, but yor mistakken. It's a varry common spoart. Mind yo dooant
catch yorsen indulging in it some day.

Number three reminds a body ov a deeal o' things, but nowt as mitch as a pop shop. Them three
gold balls 'at hing aght to show whear th' poor fowk's bankers live, if they could nobbot spaik,
could tell a tale 'at wod cap some o' them wiseacres 'at reckon to know all poor fowk's troubles,
an' th' way to cure' em. Nah, it's a puzzle to me to accaant for one o' these things, an' that
is, 'at fowk's actions should be regarded through a different standpoint to owt else i' th'
world. A little tree is a tree, an' it's nobbut a tree ha big it is--a puttate is nobbut a
puttate if it grows as big as a churn-an' a man considers hissen a man whether he's a Goliah
or a Tom Thumb. But actions are different altogether. Whether they're to be considered gooid
or bad depends entirely o' th' bugth on 'em. A chap 'at can chait somdy aght ov twenty thaasand
paands is considered smart: but a poor begger 'at stails a looaf is a thief. A chap 'at walks
into th' joint stock bank, an'. leaves th' title deeds ov his property for th' loan ov five
or six hundred paands, is an honerable tradesman, 'an it's considered a business--like act;
but a poor woman' at taks her fiat-iron to th' pop shop, an' borrows sixpence on it, commits
a sin--it's a disgrace. Aw wonder what th' mooast o' th' banks are but pop shops. What difference
is ther between a pop ticket an' a check book? Varry little nobbut th' bugth. I' my opinion
it's noa moor a disgrace for a chap to pop a paper coller nor for another to morgage a property.
Ther's a gooid deal o' speculation sometimes i' booath cases. Nah, aw once knew a chap at popt
a haufacraan for two-an-four-pence, an then sell'd th' ticket for a shillin: soa he didn't
loise owt. They're useful places i' ther way, though aw dooant mean to say at ther's noa evils
connected wi' 'em. Nah, aw once knew a woman 'at popt her husband's Sunday clooas so as shoo
could buy a new dress for hersen, 'an when he fan it aght he gave her a lickin an' had to goa
befoor th' magistrates, an' they fined him ten shillin or to goa to quad for a month, soa his
wife popt her dress to' pay th' fine. Nah, it isn't ivery evil 'at can reighten itsen like
that; an' varry likely bith time they've getten 'em aght agean they'll have lernt moor wit.

Ther's summat else 'at number three reminds me on, an' that's th' three things at we all owt
to have--Faith, Hope, an' Charity. As to Faith, ther's awther a gooid deeal on it i' th' world,
or else fowk dooant spaik truth. Hope we've all enuff on, an' some fowk moor nor what does'
em ony gooid, for they're ofter hopin nor strivin. But when it comes to Charity, then aw'm
a sooart o' fast amang it. It's a nice word, a bonny word aw think; it luks nice in a church
or a bazaar. It's a nice word to tak for a text, it saands nice onytime unless it's at a meetin
o' th' poor law guardians, then it saands harder an' harsher someway. For mi own part, aw've
niver been able to understand exactly what it meeans. I have an opinion o' mi own; but then
aw know it must be wrong, becoss it's so different to other fowk's. Aw wor once walkin aght
wi' a chap 'at wor chock full o' charity. He wor soa full on it 'at it used to roll aght ov
his maath ivery two or three minutes, and we hadn't gone far when we met a little lad, wi'
hardly a bit o' clooas on him, an' he luk'd as if he'd been livin o' th' smell ov a cook shop
for a wick, an' he coom beggin a hawpney. Well, to tell th' truth aw wor gooin to pass him,
for aw hadn't a fardin, but my charitable friend did stop, an' he patted him on his heead,
and axed if he he'd a father an' mother, an' if he went to th' Sunday schooil, an if he knew
his Catichism, an' then he sed, Well, be a good boy, an' sometime when aw've a hawpny aw'l
give it thi,' an' we went away. When we'd gooan a two or three yards he sed, 'Let's have a
glass o' ale, for aw'm dry--aw feel sooary for yond lad, but yo connot allus be givin.

Sammy Bewitched.

Aw shall niver forget Sammy Sawney. He's deead nah an' it's a pity at owt like him iver should
dee, for he wor net only t' first but aw believe t'last o' 'tsooart. Aw niver remember him
as a lad, for he wor a gooid age when aw wor born, but aw've heeard enuff abaat him to mak
me feel as if aw'd known him at that time, an' judgin' bi what aw knew on him as an old man
aw can believe it ivery word true.

Sammy's mother wor a widdy, an' he wor her only child. Shoo wor worth a little bit o' brass,
an' his fayther had been considered varry weel to do, for he'd abaat twenty hand-loom weyvers
workin for him, an' his bumbazines wor allus considered t'best i' t'market. When Sammy wor
four year old shoo detarmined to send him to t'schooil an' have him eddicated for a banker's
clerk, for to be handlin brass all t'day long wor to her t'happiest condition i' life.

It wor easy enough to send Sammy to t'schooil but to get him eddicated wor another matter,
an' whether it wor as t'schooil-maister sed, 'at his heead wor too thick iver to drive owt
into it, or, as his mother said, 'at t'schooilmaister knew nowt an' soa he could taich nowt,
aw dooant pretend to say.

Little Sammy hadn't a varry easy time on it, for he wor shifted abaat throo one schooil to
another, wol he hadn't mich o' a chonce o' leearnin' even if he had some brains, an' ther'
wor at sed he hadn't.

But his mother had faith ther wor summat in him, an' varry likely ther wor, for nowt iver coom
aght, an' what some fowk called wrangheeadedness, shoo considered to be genius badly directed.

One day he wor at t'beckside, an' shoo went to see what he wor dooin', an' as shoo saw he'd
nobbut one clog, shoo axed him what he'd done wi' tother, an' he sed he'd made it into a booat,
an' it had sailed away down t'beck, soa shoo tawked nicely, an' tell'd him he shouldn't do
soa, for it wor lost, an' he mud allus remember 'at if he put owt into t'beck, he'd niver see
it ony moor, for t'watter ran daan at sich a rate; but he sed he'd fun aght a better way o'
dooin' it next time, for he'd put t'furst in wi' t'toa pointin daan t'hill, but when he put
t'next in, he'd point t'toa up t'hill, an' it wouldn't find it quite soa easy gooin.

"A'a, Sammy lad," sed his mother, as shoo stroked his heead, "tha's a deal moor i' this nop
nor ivver thi fayther had, or me awther, for aw should niver ha' thowt o' that." Sammy put
tother in, takkin care to point t'toe t'contrary way to what t'watter wor runnin, but as sooin
as he left lawse it turned raand an' foller'd tother, an' wor sooin aght o' seet.

"Nah, then!" he sed "didn't aw tell yo? If it hadn't turned raand, it 'ud ha' been goin' up
t'hill, but t'chap 'at made them clogs didn't mak' 'em reights an' lefts. Yo see they're booath
left, an' aw believe that's the reason aw've allus been lat to t'schooil."

"Niver heed, Sammy, tha shalln't go to t'school ony moor, for aw believe tha'rt better able
to taich t'maisters nor they are to taich thee."

"Awm sewer on it mother; for t'last maister aw had sed awd towt him patience, an' awm sartin
he niver towt me owt."

"Come thi ways, lad, an' awl buy thee some new clogs at another shop, but dooant put any moor
into that beck, unless tha tees a string to 'em, if tha does awst ha' to give thee a lickin,
soa tha knows; for even knowledge can be bowt too dear."

After gettin his new clogs, shoo tuk him into a spice shop to buy a penorth o' owt he liked,
soa he ax'd t'old woman for a penorth o' humbugs; but as sooin as he'd getten 'em, he altered
his mind an' thowt he'd have acid drops, soa shoo changed em'; but he'd hardly getten 'em when
he changed his mind, an' said he'd rayther have a rockstick, an' when he'd gate that, he wor
walkin' aght, an' shoo sang aght after him 'at he'd niver paid her for it.

"Why, aw gave yo t'acid drops for it."

"Eea, but tha niver paid for t'acid drops."

"A'a, what a tale I didn't aw give yo t'humbugs?"

"But tha niver paid for t'humbugs."

"Why, aw havn't etten t'humbugs, have aw? Didn't aw give' em yo agean? Yo dooant want payin'
twice, sewerlee?"

"Well aw dooant know hah it is, what tha says saands reight enuff; but what aw do know is,
at tha's getten a rockstick, an' aw havn't getten a penny."

"You see what it is to be a scholar," sed his mother; "but yo'st loise nowt bi a child o' mine,"
soa shoo gave her t'penny an' coom away.

As they wor walkin on, Sammy put t'last bit into his maath an' sed, "mother, can yo tell me
why is old Sally like that rockstick?"

"Nay lad, awm sewer aw cannot."

"Becoss they've booath getten suckt."

"A'a, lad, dooant study soa mich, awm feeard strainin thi brain, but can ta spell brain?"

"Brane."

"Nay, lad, ther's a I in it."

"Then aw must have three, if aw've two i' mi heead an' one i' mi brain."

"Aw niver thowt o' that, but tha'rt far too clivver for me, an' awst nivver rest until aw get
thi into a bank."

Now it soa happened 'at ther wor a man 'at had done business wi' Sammy's fayther i' former
days, an' after a bit o' persuadin he consented to tak' him into his office, an' t'lad wor
soa praad ov his place, 'at, strange as it seems, he did begin to leearn a bit o' summate T'chap
tuk a deeal o' pains wi him, an' his mother's heart wor oft made glad wi' hearin a gooid accaant
of his gooins on. When he used to goa to his dinner wi' a pen stuck behind his ear, an' his
finger daubed wi' ink, as if he'd been cleeanin' aght t'ink bottles, shoo could hardly keep
her arms off his neck, an' monny a time shoo'd sit watchin him as he put t'puddin aght o' t'seet,
wi' tears in her een, an' wish his farther wor thear to see him. But his face grew whiter an'
he didn't seem to have as mich life in him as he used to have, an' this caused her a deeal
ov uneasiness, an' at last shoo decided to goa an' have a word wi' his maister. Shoo went to
t'office, an' they made a gurt fuss o' t'old woman an' ax'd her into a private raam to sit daan.

"Aw've come," shoo sed, "to have a word or two abaat ahr Sammy; aw should like to know hah
yo think he gets on?"

"Better than we expected," he said; "he runs errands very well and his writing is better than
it was, but his spelling wants improving, yet we think we shall be able to make a man of him."

"Well, if that's all aw think he'll get better on it, an' as for spellin a word wrang nah an'
then aw dooant see 'at that maks mich difference soa long as yo know what it meeans. But what
do yo think troubles him t'mooast?"

"Well at the present time it's with the which's, but you must excuse me just now for a very
important customer has called and I must see him." Soa he jumpt up an' left her. It didn't
tak her long to get hooam, an' as shoo'd allus been ov a superstitious way o' thinkin, her
mind wor filled wi' anxiety abaat her lad.

"Just to think," shoo sed, as shoo trudged along, "'at he should be bewitched! A grand lad
like him-but it's somdy at's done it just aght o' spite, an' aw've a varry gooid noation who's
done it. It's that nasty gooid-for-nowt 'at lives at t'back o' awr haase,--shoo's niver been
able to bide t'seet on him sin' he cut her cat tail off, an' shoo knew well enuff he nobbut
did it for fun. But awl see if aw connot braik t'spell." As shoo had to pass a smithy on her
way hooam shoo went in, an' axed if they'd an old horseshoe to give her, for shoo knew that
wor a thing 'at witches couldn't bide t'seet on.

"Why, Meary, what dun yo want it for. Are yo freetened o' t'boggards?"

"Awst nooan be freetened o' thee if tha wor a boggard," shoo sed, "but has ta getten one?"

"Well, aw dooant know, but aw've a pair o' donkey shooin here, if tha thinks they'll fit yor
Sammy tha can have' em an' welcome."

"Aw think they'd be a deeal moor likely to fit thee, judgin bi t'length o' thi ears," shoo
sed; "but aw want a horseshoe if tha's getten one, an' if tha hasn't say soa, an' dooant keep
me waitin here."

He hunted abaat till he rooited one aght, an' he gave it her, an' shoo put it in her pocket
an' went off withaat iver stoppin to thank him for it. When Sammy had getten his supper shoo
sent him to bed, an' tell'd him to leave her his waistcoit, as shoo wanted to do summat at
it. As sooin as shoo wor bi hersen shoo pool'd t'horseshoe aght ov her pocket an' began to
plan hah shoo could fasten it to t'back ov his waistcoit, for shoo thowt that wod be t'best
place for it, an' although it wor a nasty thing to hug up an daan, yet it wor a deeal better
nor havin to live under t'influence ov a evil eye. It tuk her a bit o' seheamin befoor shoo
gate it stitched on to her fancy, but patience won t'battle, an' when shoo went to bed she
felt easier in her mind.

T'next mornin shoo'd a deal o' trouble to get Sammy to put it on, for he couldn't tell t'meanin
on it, but his mother lukt soa serious abaat it 'at he didn't like to say he wodn't wear it.

He went to his wark, but his jacket didn't fit quite as well as usual, an' as for keep in his
waistcoat i' ony-bit-like shape, he couldn't do it, for t'weight behind wor soa heavy wol it
pool'd t'buttons ommost up to his chin, an' when he sat on his stooil i' t'front o' t'desk,
he felt as if somdy wor tryin' to upset him backards. When he went to his dinner, he felt as
if he wor huggin a pack, an' he begged hard ov his mother to let him goa withaat it, but shoo
sed shoo darn't trust him aght ov her seet if he hadn't it on, for it wor to shield him. "It's
a queer place for a shield," he sed, "but awl try it this afternooin, an' if it doesn't feel
easier awst niver put it on agean."

When he coom hooam at neet, he wor booath tired an' cross; an' after his Supper he gat a slate
an' pencil an' sat daan to write, lukkin' varry glum. His mother watched him varry anxiously
for a while, an' then shoo sed quietly, "Tha doesn't look varry weel to-neet, Sammy, does ta
think tha'rt goin' to have a spell o' sickness?" "Noa, but awm sick o' spellin', for t'gaffer's
allus agate on me becoss aw connot spell 'which.' Aw've spell'd it wich-whitch-witch-an' which-du'
awl goa to hummer if aw can tell which is which even nah. Aw wish ther worn't a which."

"Which witch does ta mean, Sammy?"

"Aw can't tell which which, aw wish aw could."

"A'a Sammy," shoo sed, an shoo threw her arms raand his neck, "tha's taen a load offmy mind!"

"Well, you've putten me one on to mi waistcoit."

"Tak it off, lad, for tha doesn't need it! Tha doesn't know hah thankful aw am, for when aw
wor tawkin' to thi maister yesterday he sed tha wor troubled wi' witches, an' aw sewed t'horseshoe
on to scare 'em."

"Which whiches did he mean?"

"Which witches witch?"

"Aw can't tell which is which."

"Nivver heed which it is, Sammy, soa long as it isn't a witch. If it's nobbut a difference
ov a letter or two aw can't see 'at it means owt. Goa thi ways to bed, an' dooant let me have
to call on thee for a clock haar before tha frames to get up."

Hard to Pleeas.

"Aa, well! Wonders'll nivver cease! Come thi ways in! Whativver's browt thee here ov a day
like this? It isn't fit to turn a dog aght ot door."

"Noa lass, an' if awd been a dog aw dooant think awst ha turned aght, but bein' a poor widdy
woman my life's war nor a dog's life onny day ith wick."

"Tak thi bonnet an shawl off an creep up to th' range. Awm sure awm fain tha's com'd, for aw
wor gettin' reight looansum, for my felly an booath oth lads have gooan to th' taan, an they'll
nooan be back afoor neet. But what is it 'at's made thee turn aght ov a day like this?"

"Tha may weel ax, but aw hardly dar tell thee Nanny, for aw knaw varry weel 'at them 'at goa
a borrowin' goa a sorrowin', an to mak a long stooary short, awve come to see if tha can leean
me ten shillin' wol awr Harriet Ann's next draw day, for awm behund hand wi mi rent, an tha
knows what sooart ov a chap awr landlord is, for although we've lived i' yond haase aboon twenty
year, he'd think noa moor abaat puttin' th' bums in, if we were an haar behund wi th' rent,
nor he wod o' spittin' aght."

"Why, Jenny, tha knows hah awm fixed, Aw've nooan too mich to stir on, for yond lads' bellies
tak moor fillin' nor onnybody'd believe, an' that felly o' mine smooks moor bacca nor aw do
believe ud fill a seck. He's nivver th' pipe aght ov his maath nobbut when he's aitin or else
asleep, an not allus then, an as times is it's ommost a wonder to see a shillin' or two, an'
aw've nivver had a new cap sin last Mikelmas, an ther's noa signs 'at aw see on, for awr Alick's
naggin' at me ivvery day for a new this or a new that, wol mi life's a looad to me; but awl
see what aw can do for thee, but goodness knaws awm poor enuff."

Soa Nanny went to th' little corner cubbord, an after clatterin' th' cups an plates abaat,
shoo managed to find ten shillin', an shoo caanted 'em aght one bi one, an' then wi a sigh
'at wor ommost a sob, shoo sed, "Thear it is, an aw hooap tha'll net forget to let me have
it back as sooin as tha can. But hah is it tha's managed to run short?"

"A'a, lass! It's th' same old tale. It matters little what yo do for a child at this day, yo're
niver onny better thowt on, and when they've takken th' bit aght o' yer maath, they'd have
yor teeth if they could mak onny use on 'em. Aw think awr Harriet Ann 'll bring mi grey hairs
wi sorrow to th' grave."

"Why, awm capt to hear thee say soa abaat her, for aw allus thowt 'at yor Harriet Ann wor one
oth nicest lasses awd iver met. But what's th' matter? Shoo hasn't started o' gooin to th'
doncin' classes or owt o' that sooart, surelee?"

"Nay, nowt o' that sooart; it's war nor that. Shoo's net to be called a ill en, but shoo's
sich a fooil, an if shoo sets her mind o' owt shoo'll do it if shoo has to wade throo fire
and watter. But it maks me fair poorly to think on it, to say nowt abaat tellin' it."

"Why, tak hold o' that teah pot an sup aght oth spaat, it'll cheer thee up a bit; for if there
is owt 'at's heartsluftin, it is what mothers have to put up wi throo undutiful bairns."

"A'a, aw want noa teah, lass; awd mi braikfast just afoor aw started aght."

"Thee taste o' that an tha'll find it'll do thee gooid."

"Eea, an it is gooid too! That warms me reight daan to mi tooas. Ther's nivver nowt seems to
settle my stummock like a drop o' gin an watter. But whativer maks thee keep it ith teapot?"

"Why, tha sees, it doesn't allus do to have a bottle an a glass oth table, for yo niver know
who may pop in, an aw dooant like to set it befoor th' childer for fear it mud tempt 'em to
tak it befoor they've getten sense to know hah to use it, an awm sewer aw should nivver think
o' lukkin t'side it wor on throo one year's end to another if it worn't for theas pains i'
mi inside, for it's phisick to me an noa mistak."

"Aw can believe thee weel enuff, for ther's nowt seems to do as weel for me."

"Well, tha hasn't tell'd me thi trubble yet, an awd like to know, an may be aw can help thee
a bit, for two heeads is better nor one, if one is nobbut--tha knows what."

"Tha sees, awr Harriet Ann wor as gooid a lass as iver stept till shoo began o' coortin', an
th' furst warnin' aw had wor th' last draw day, for asteead o' givin' me two paand ten, shoo
nobbut gave me thirty shillin', an when aw axed her hah it wor shoo sed aw mud try an mak it
do, for shoo wanted to buy a two-o'-three bits o' things, for shoo'd made up her mind to get
wed. Tha could ha fell'd me wi a bean when shoo sed that, for if ther wor owt i' this world
'at aw wor anxious abaat it wor 'at shoo'd ha moor sense nor to get wed, soa aw axed her who
it wor, but shoo nobbut laft an sed aw should varry likely know him when aw saw him. Nah, tha
knows, Nanny, it wor nivver my way to goa abaat pryin' into other fowks' consarns, but aw couldn't
do but ax one or two ov her comrades an try to get to know who he wor, but all awve fun aght
soa far is 'at he's a young gooid-fer-nowt, 'at nawther is owt nor nivver will be, an he wants
her for nowt i' this world but to work to keep him, wol he spends his days drinkin' an dog
feightin an pidgeon flyin', an' after all th' trouble 'at aw've been at to bring her up in
a respectable way, awm sewer it's enuff to braik th' heart ov a stooan. Shove that teah pot
on here agean, for awm reight daan faint."

"Sup lass, for aw can sympathise wi thee, an if it 'ad been a paand tha'd wanted to borra tha
should ha had it. But tha hasn't all th' trouble to thisen, for aw've getten a share as weel
as thee. Awl tak a drop o' that if tha'll hand th' teah pot this way. But mine's a deeal war
nor thine, for awr Alick (a better lad nivver wor born--aw used to say when he wor a babby
'at he'd nivver live, for when he wor varry near doubled up wi th' ballywark he'd ligg in his
creddle an hardly mak a muff) he's gooin to mak a fooil ov hissen an all, for he's pickt up
some idle trolly, an he's savin' up his brass to ware it o' her, an he's aght two or three
neets ith wick, an if aw ax him owt he says, "Yo'll find it aght in a bit," an if he doesn't
find it aght it'll cap me, for his fayther tell'd me 'at he saw him walkin' abaat last Horton
Tide wi a woman hook'd ov his arm, an what maks it war is aw've heeard at shoo's nooan to gooid,
an he's as simple as a cauf, an shoo can just twist him raand her little finger. When aw wor
puttin' his Sunday clooas away last wick aw fan a thimmel an a hairpin, an a mintdrop 'at had
been hauf suckt (an aw know awr Alick niver aits spice) in his britches pocket, an when he
coom hooam he wor ommost ranty wol he knew what had come on 'em, an when aw gave 'em him he
lapt 'em up i' paper an lukt as suited as if he'd fun a fortun."

"Th' teah-pot's empty if it means owt, but aw wor just gooin to say 'at tha knows we can nivver
put old heeads onto young shoolders, an awm sooary to hear 'at yor Alick's noa moor wit, but
still it isn't as bad a case as mine, for tha sees if a chap gets wed he's th' maister, but
a lass has to do as shoo can."

"Nay, net it! It's th' wimmen 'at's th' maisters oth men, aw know that mysen. Whear wod that
felly o' mine ha been if it hadn't been for me? Why he'd ha been ith warkus long sin, if he
hadn't been in his grave. Try this, sithee, it's sweeter nor th' last."

"Eea, it's sweeter, but it 'ud do wi a drop moor gin in it if it's all th' same to thee."

"It is rayther waik, but as aw wor sayin', tha sees awr Alick's allus lived at hooam, an he's
nivver known what it's been to want for owt, even to his booits bein' blackened for Sunday,
an if he gets hold o' that nasty powse (for shoo's nowt else who shoo is), whativver mun come
on him."

"Eea, an whativer mun come o' awr Harriet Ann? Did ta put owt into th' teah-pot, Nanny?"

"Aw filled it nobbut a minnit sin, an if it's empty tha must ha supt it."

"Nay, awve nobbut tasted abaat twice. Happen it runs."

"Awm sure it runs, but it's aght oth spaat. Put it aght oth seet. Ther's awr Alick comin' up
th' gate, an yor Harriet Ann follerin' him. It's reight fair wearisome. If a body gets set
daan for a bit ov a talk ther's sure somebdy to come. What's browt yo two here at this time
aw should like to know?" "Whear's ta left thi fayther, Alick?"

"He's gooan to luk at some pigs aw believe. He said he'd be hooam i' gooid time, an yo hadn't
to get him onny drinkin' ready, for he'd have some o' that cold broth."

"Then he's baan drinkin'! Aw know as weel as can be, for he allus taks some wrang-heeaded noation
when he's baan to get a bellyful o' ale. A'a! It caps me what fowk can see i' gooin an makkin
a swill tub o' ther guts! If aw mud ha my mind ther shouldn't be a drop for onybody unless
they wor poorly! But whear's ta been, Harriet Ann? Aw thowt tha wor at thi wark?"

"Shoo wod ha been but for me," sed Alick; "but aw chonced to meet her, an as we'd a bit o'
bizness we gate that done, an then we went on to Jenny's, but th' door wor lockt, soa aw sed
varry likely shoo'd be up here, an it seems aw wor abaat reight, an aw persuaded Harriet Ann
to come up wi me, for it isn't fit weather for noa Christian to be aght in."

"Come on an sit thee daan, Alick. Awm sooary to hear sich a bad accaant on thee, but tha art
better nor awr Harriet Ann, for shoo knows awm behund wi mi rent, an shoo couldn't do but waste
another day."

"Dooant yo bother yersen, Jenny, we've just com'd to keep yo company a bit. Aw say, mother!
dooant yo think yo've a drop o' summat short, 'at yo could mak Harriet Ann a sup to keep her
throo catchin' cowld?"

"Tha knows ther's nowt 'short' i' this haase nobbut a drop o' gin 'at's kept o' purpose for
thi fayther when he's th' backwark, but as it's Harriet Ann awl mak her a little drop."

"A'a, aw cannot sup all that, Nanny, aw nobbut want a tooithful," sed Harriet.

"Ther's happen somdy else wants th' cold keepin' aght as weel as thee," sed Jenny.

"Awve been hearin' some sad tales abaat thee Harriet Ann," sed Nanny. "Awve allus thowt as
mich o' thee as if tha wor one o' mi own, an' thi mother's been tellin' me abaat some sad gooins
on; but aw hooap 'at tha'll allus remember 'at tha's coine ov a daycent stock, an awm sewer
yon gooid-for-nowt 'at's allus hankerin' after thee meeans thee noa gooid. Bi all aw can hear
he's a low-lived offal'd scamp, an' if tha gets wed to him tha'll have to sup sorrow bi spooinsful."

"Dooant keep that gin all to thisen. Basta noa manners?" sed Jenny.

"Aw dooant know what yo're tawkin abaat," sed Harriet.

"Yi tha does; aw meean that chap 'at's reckonin' to cooart thee! When aw wor thy age awd moor
sense nor to believe ivvery lyin' lumpheead 'at coom i' mi way, but lasses dooant seem to care
who get's 'em nah. If it's owt ith shape ov a felly it'll do."

"Why, awm sewer yo must be mistakken, Nanny, for ther's nubdy cooartin' me."

"Nah it's noa gooid denyin' it 'coss awr Alick's here, for yo're both ith same box! He's as
big a fooil as thee! Net 'at awve owt ageean him gettin' wed, net aw! Aw shall be rare an'
glad to be shut on him, but aw did think he'd have gumshun enuff to luk aght for somdy 'at
wodn't disgrace booath him an' all 'at belangs to him. But he Wor allus a strackle brain, an'
he will be till he's bowt his wit, an' it'll be varry weel for him if he doesn't buy it too
dear. But if he does wed a trolly like her, he mun keep her, an' aw hooap he'll nivver let
me see her, that's all; for shoo shall nivver enter my door nor have a bite nor a sup in a
haase o' mine! Here, Harriet Ann, lass, taste o' this for awm Sure tha luks as if tha'd do
wi' summat."

"Aw dooant know what yo meean, mother," said Alick, "for awm sewer my cooartin days is ovver."

"If aw thowt they wor aw should be th' happiest woman under th' sun, but tha must ha dropt
it varry suddenly."

"Well, it's true, an awl promise yo 'at awl nivver start agean till ther's a death ith family."

"What wor aw tellin' thee, Jenny, before he come in? Isn't he a gooid lad thinks ta? He'll
nivver get wed wol his old mother's alive, he's too mich sense."

"He's a lad to be praad on, Nanny; aw wish awr Harriet Ann could say like him."

"Awl promise yo 'at awl nivver cooart agean whether ther's a deeath ith family or net."

"You've booath turned varry gooid all ov a sudden, aw should like to know what it all meeans?"

"It means nowt, mother, nobbut this-'at Harriet Ann an me thowt we could be varry comfortable
together, an soa we've getten wed this mornin'."

"Yo desarve to be horsewipt! Awm in a gooid mind to thresh thee Alick as long as aw can bide
to stand ovver thee! Had ta noa more sense nor' to throw thisen away after a thing like Harriet
Ann."

"Does ta meean ta tell me 'at tha'd noa more respect for thisen nor to wed a haufthick like
Alick. A'a, Harriet Ann, what wod thi fayther ha sed if he'd been here?"

"Awr Alick's noa fooil Jenny I dooant thee say that. Yor Harriet Ann knew what shoo wor dooin."

"Awr Harriet Ann's as gooid as yor Alick!"

"Well, awr Alick's as gooid as yor Harriet Ann!"

"Noa daat we're one as gooid as t'other, an as we're satisfied aw think yo owt to be, an' here's
yor varry gooid health," sed Alick, seizin hold oth teah-pot to sup.

"Put that daan! Tha doesn't want onny teah!" sed Nanny.

"It's geoid teah is this; aw've monny a time ta'en a gooid swig aght o' that teah-pot before
to-day."

"O, soa that's where thi fayther's physic go as is it. Tha's allus been a bad lad Alick, an'
awve had to put up wi' thee, but dooant say owt abaat th' teah-pot to thi fayther."

"It's ommost time mi fayther wor here, isn't it?"

"Well, aw dooant know ha yo can fashion to luk him ith face when he does come, but it's done
nah, so we shall have to mak th' best on it, but awst niver forgie Harriet Ann for deceivin'
me. Here's thi fayther! Nah for it! Aw wish aw wor a thaasand mile away throo here this minit."

"Hallo! Are yo havin' a teah-drinkin'. What's to do, Jenny?"

"Nay, yo mun ax yor Nanny."

"What's up, Nanny lass?"

"Can't ta see what's up? Tha must be blind aw think or else druffen! Aw could see what wor
to do as sooin as aw dapt mi een on 'em! Awr Alick an' Harriet Ann's gooan an getten wed, that's
what's to do!"

"Why, an' a gradely pair they mak! Aw nivver thowt tha wor hawf sich a judge ov a lass as tha's
proved thisen. Aw allus sed aw thowt Harriet Ann wor th' bonniest lass i' Yorksher. Awm soa
suited wol awd ommost forgetten awd th' backwark. Is there a drop o' gin i' that bottle, Nanny?"

"Tha gets a deal more gin than does thee onny gooid, an aw think that backwark is oft an excuse."

"Dooant lets have onny grumlin' o'th' weddin' day, for Alick's suited me to nowt, an awm sewer
shoo's th' lass awve heeard thee say tha could like him to have."

"Awve nowt agean th' match 'at aw know on, nobbut they should ha been content to wait a year
or two. They're both on 'em sadly to young."

"Why, thee an' me started when we wor monny a year younger nor them. Awr Alick wor born before
tha wor as old as Harriet Ann. Awve wondered monny a time if Alick wor iver baan to start.'

"Has ta noa moor sense nor to talk like that afoor bits o' childer. If shoo's as mich bother
wi' him as awve had wi' thee, shoo'l wish shoo'd nivver set een on him."

"But whear do yo meean to live? Yo'll want a haase somewhear."

"We've takken yond little cottage 'at yo can see o'th' hill-side yonder, an' we've getten a
bit o' furniture into it for a start."

"Why, that's the varry haase aw allus sed aw should like to live in if ivver awd to flit,"
sed Jenny.

"Well, yo can come as sooin as yo like an' keep for Harriet Ann company, an' if yo'll nobbut
behave yorsen awl buy yo a teah-pot like that o' mi mother's, an' yo can have it oth hob end
throo morn to neet."

"That's reight enuff Alick, but aw should ha been better satisfied if--

"That's what aw say Jenny, aw should ha been better satisfied if--

"Caar ye daan, an' let th' young ens alooan, for for like all old wimmen, for hard to pleeas."

Ratcatchin'.

Ther's roguery i' ivvery trade but awrs, awve' heeard fowk say, an "ivverybody's honest till
they're fun aght." That white hen at' nivver lays away hasn't been hatched yet. It taks all
sooarts to mak a world an aw suppooas if they wornt ratcatchers ther'd be summat short. Sam
Sniffle wor a karacter in his way, he seemed to have a bit ov a smatterin' o' iverything, but
what he professed to know th' mooast abaat wor dogs an rats. Noa daat he had a bit o' knowledge,
but what wor far more sarviceable to him nor owt else wor a simple luk 'at he could put on,
an' a bit ov a lisp 'at he had, made him seem soa harmless an simple 'at yo wodn't believe
it possible for him to do owt wrang. He worn't varry big, but he wor varry wiry, an as full
o' pluck as a gamcock.

Aw remember one neet as he wor gooin hooam (net becoss he thowt it wor time, but becoss his
brass wor done), he happened to hear a bobby comin' as he turned th' street corner. It wor
varry dark, soa he just stept back an waited for him comin', an as sooin as his heead popt
past th' corner, he gave him what he called a cauf-knock an sent him sprawlin' his whoal length
ith middle oth rooad. He wor hardly daan befoor Sam ran to help him up. "A'a! whativver's to
do mister poleeceman?" he sed. "Are yo hurt? Do tell me," an he helpt him up an began to wipe
th' muck off his clooas wi' his pocket hankerchy. Th' poleeceman turned his bull's-eye onto
his face, but nubdy could suspect Sam. "Did ta see it done?" he axd. "Eea, aw saw it as fair
as could be. It's a burnin' shame 'at sich like fowk cannot be stransported! it is act'ly.
Awm sewer aw could ommost roar mi een up when aw see onnybody ill used like that." "Does ta
think tha'd know him if tha'd to see him agean?" axd th' bobby. "Awm sewer aw' could, an' th'
furst time he passes me awl bring him up to th' poleece office if aw have to wheel him in a
barro." "Well, here's a shillin' for helpin' me up, an be sewer an keep thi een oppen." "Nay,
nay, keep yor brass," sed Sam, "awm naoan one a' that sooart 'at wants payin' for dooin a kindness
'at costs me nowt, but awl tak it, tho' awst nivver have th' heart to spend it, but awm mich
obleeged to yo, an aw wish yo gooid neet, an hooap yo'll meet wi noa moor misfortunes." "Aw
hooap net, an' if they wor all like thee th' poleece ud have a easy time on it." "Why, maister,
if they wor all like me ther wodn't be onny poleece, for aw havn't a heart i' mi belly big
enuff for sich a job." Sam left him, an th' furst public haase he coome to he went in an had
a rare spree wi' th' shillin', but when he coom aght, if onnybody'd met him they'd ha been
just as likely to think he'd been to a teetotal meetin' an' signed th' pledge.

But if yo'd wanted to see him when he put on his varry simple smile, yo should ha seen him
when a lady browt him a pet dog 'at wor poorly. He wor noated far an wide as a dog doctor,
an ladies used to come throo all pairts wi ther pet's to ax Sam's advice. Hahivver ugly a little
brute chonced to be brawt, Sam had his nomony ready. "A'a, that is a little beauty, mum, aw
havn't seen one like that, mum, aw can't say when, mum. Aw dooant think yo'd like to pairt
wi' it mum?"

"Oh, no! I would not part with it for its weight in gold I It's such a faithful little dear!"

"Awm sewer on it, mum, yo can see it in it. It's the varry picture o' faithfulishness. If yo
leeav it wi' me it'll be weel takken care on, mum. An what name might yo call it, mum?"

"We call it Lion."

"That's just th' name for a little pet like this, it is fer sewer."

"What do you think is the matter with the little darling?"

Then Sam ud tak it in his hands, an after strokin' it an smellin' at its breath, he'd give
it a nip 'at ud mak it yelp aght ten thaasand murders, then he'd shake his heead an say, "Aw
thowt what wor th' matter as sooin as aw saw it, mum; yo see it's soa varry tender it can hardly
bide touchin'. It's sufferin wi' enflimashun ov its liver. It's a strange thing, but it's a
disease 'at's gooin abaat amang dogs just at present. Ther's monny a scoor dee ivvery wick,
for yo see ther's net monny 'at know hah to doctor 'em for it. It's a pratty little thing.
It'll have to have some castor hoil an a paather, mum. Aw think aw can cure it in a wick, mum."

"Well, then, I must leave it with you, and be sure to treat the little thing kindly."

"Kindly! Why, mum, awd give it th' bit aght o' mi maath. It owt to have some warm milk an a
paather th' furst thing, but aw dooant happen to have onny ith haase, an my lad willn't be
hooam befoor dark, an it's been awr rent day to-day, but as sooin: as ivver he comes wi his
wage awl get it some, tho' it's a pity, poor thing, 'at it connot have it nah, but yo see aw
didn't know 'at it wor comin'."

After this speech he wor sewer to get a shillin', an sometimes hauf-a-craan, an as he nivver
reckoned owt off his doctor's bill, he called that "extra bunce."

As sooin as shoo'd getten nicely aght oth gate he'd give it a claat oth side oth heead, to
let it know at th' beginnin' what it might expect if it didn't behave, an then he'd tak it
into th' cellar an tee some band raand it neck an festen it to th' wall, an throw it a bit
o' strea to lig on, an after chuckin' it a crust o' breead an' givin' it some watter, he'd
leeav it tellin' it 'at as sooin as it had browt its stummack daan to that it ud noa daat feel
better. It ud be pratty sewer to freat a bit but Sam ud tak noa noatice wol th' next day, an
when he went to luk at it, if he fan th' breead an waiter untouched he'd leeav it agean. Abaht
th' third day he says they generally begin to nibble a bit, an as sooin as he saw that he used
to give 'em a bit o' sop or summat, but he took gooid care net to give 'em too mich. Bi th'
end oth wick they wor cured, an' he used to wesh 'em an cooam 'em, an tee a bit a blue ribbon
raand ther neck, an' tak 'em hooam, an' when ther mistresses saw 'em jumpin' an' caperin' abaat,
an ommost fit to ait th' fire iron's, they paid him what he charged withaat a word, an gave
him credit for being th' best dog doctor ith country.

He made a gooid deal o' brass i' that way, but that didn't pay him as weel as ratcatchin'.
Ther wor nivver onnybody could equal Sam at catch in' a rat, for he wor nivver known to fail.
At all th' big haases ith district he wor as weel known! as th' pooastman. He's gien up th'
trade nah, or else aw wodn't let yo into th' saycret. This is th' way he used to do. Th' cooachman
or th' buttler throo Some hall wod come to tell Sam 'at he wor wanted as sooin as ivver he
could spare time, to goa up to th' hall to catch a rat 'at one oth sarvents had seen ith pantry,
for they wor all soa freetened 'at they darn't goa in.

Sam wod promise to be up directly, an he'd put a net into his coit pocket, an a two-o-three
breead crumbs in a bit o' paper, an a rat, ommost as big as a kittlin, but withaat a tooith
in its heead, into his inside brast pocket, an then he'd set off. When he gate thear all th'
sarvent lasses ud cluther raand him an tell him whear th' rat had been seen an all particulars.
"Well, they're a nasty thing to have abaat a haase, an a varry dangerous thing; but awl do
mi best to catch it if yo'll give me a sup o' ale if yo have it, an if net, pooarter'll do.
Aw want it to mix up summat to tice it aght." They seldom browt less nor a quairt, an after
takkin abaat a thimbleful to mix up his breead crumbs, he swallow'd t'other for fear on it
bein wasted. Then he'd tak a cannel an goa to whear th' rat had been last seen, an all th'
lasses followin at a distance. After puttin his bait on th' floor an th' cannel ith far corner,
he'd begin chirpin an huntin under th' barrels an all abaat to see if ther wor a rat, but as
he seldom fan one, when he thowt he'd carried it on long enuff, he'd set up a gurt shaat, "It's
here! it's here!" an pawse th' cannel ovver with his fooit, an as they couldn't tell where
it might be they all flew off skrikin, leavin' Sam to quietly pool his "owd forrester," as
he called him, aght ov his pocket an lap it up ith net an come aght holdin' it at arms' length.
Then away went th' haasekeeper to tell th' mistress, an th' mistress to tell th' maister, an
in a varry few minits ivverybody abaat th' place wor ith kitchen, standin in a ring wi Sam
an th' rat ith middle. Sam wor a hero just then, but to luk at his face yo'd fancy he hadn't
sense enuff to know it. Ov coorse ther wor nowt to gooid for Sam after that, an he'd allus
as mich to ait an drink as he could tuck into him an a hauf-a-craan beside. Aw dooant know
hah monny times he catched that rat, but aw do know 'at he catched it three times i' one haase,
an he tell'd me he made as mich brass on it as monnya chap could mak wi a horse an cart. He'd
a deeal more queer tricks, but as he gate older he gave it up, for he said it wor all vanity;
an as he wanted to settle daan an leead a quiet life, he tuk a beershop, an nah he amuses hiss
en an his customers wi sittin' at th' end oth langsettle an tellin' his experience, an if one
hawf o' what he says is true, when he dees he owt to be put under a glass shade an stuck ith
Halifax museum.

Owd Moorcock.

It's monny a long year sin what awm gooin to tell tuk place, but aw remember it as weel as
if it wor yesterday. He wor a queer sooart ov a chap, wor owd Drake, an although some laft
at him, an considered him an oddity, ther wor a gooid deeal moor 'at believed him to be a born
genius. He wor a cobbler bi trade, an a varry gooid cobbler too, tho' he'd nivver sarved his
time to it; an altho' he'd had two or three gooid chonces o' startin' business ith' taan, yet
he allus shook his heead, an sed he'd rayther goa on as he wor a bit longer. Th' fact wor he
loved his liberty, an he'd getten a noashun 'at if he left his little hooam i' th' country,
he'd leeav his freedom wi it. An it's hardly to be wondered at, for his snug cot lukt th' pictur'
o' comfort. It wor a one-stooary buildin' wi a straw thack, an all th' walls wor covered wi
honeysuckle an' jessamine, an th' windows could hardly be seen for th' green leaves 'at hung
as a veil i' th' front on 'em. Stooan-crop an haaseleek had takken up a hooam i' th' gutter,
an th' chimley wor ommost hid wi ivy. It wor a queer-shaped place altogether--all nucks an
corners--But it wor just what suited David. They called him David Drake, tho' he wor known
best as Owd Moorcock. I' th' front wor a nice bit o' garden, allus kept trim, an seldom withaat
a show o' bloom o' one sooart or another; an away to one side wor what he called his farm--a
bit o' land abaat ten yards wide, an twenty long--whear he grew his cabbages an puttates an
sich like; an all araand for miles wor moorland covered wi heather, an stockt wi game, except
at th' back ov his cot, whear a bluff-lukkin hill sprang ommost straight up, makkin' a stranger
feel afeeard lest it should tak a fancy to topple over an' bury booath th' cot an all in it.
But if th' aghtside wor curious, th' inside wor a deal moor soa; an it wornt to be wondered
at if a gooid monny fowk paid David a visit when they'd hauf a day to spare. He'd a wife--geniuses
generally manage to get a wife if they get nowt else, an it isn't allus 'at they mak th' wisest
choice; but David mud ha done war, for Dolly-o'-Dick's-o'-th'- Dike, as shoo wor called, wor
as queer a customer as her husband, an if we're to believe what shoo says, if it hadn't ha
been for her, Dave wod ha been a poor lost craytur. Shoo didn't appreciate his genius that's
true, but wives as a rule niver do; but shoo let him have his own way, an sometimes, when her
wark wor done, shoo'd even help him wi some of his fooilery. Aw'd heeard a gooid deal abaat
'em, soa one day aw detarmined aw'd pay 'em a visit, soa, after gettin' off at th' Copley Station,
aw started to climb a rough, steep loin, moor like th' bed of a beck nor owt else, but trees
o' awther side hung over wol they met at th' top, an made a cooil shade 'at wor varry welcome,
for aw wor ommost sweltered. After a long scramel aw fan misen o Norland Moor--an it wor a
seet worth tewing for, for th' heather wor i' bloom, an it lukt as if a purple carpet had been
laid for th' buzzards an bees to frolic on; an ther wor sich a hum raand wol it saanded as
if they wor playin' bass to th' skylarks 'at wor warblin' up aboon. Aw struck aght in as straight
a line as aw could for David's, an havin come to th' garden gate, aw stopt a minnit to admire
th' flaars 'at covered th' graand an th' walls, an even stretched far onto th' thack. Aw hadn't
stood long when a voice claise to my ear sed--

"Might yo be lukkin' for somdy?"

"Are yo Mistress Drake?" aw axed.

"Eea, aw believe aw am; but what might yo be wantin'? If yo've owt to sell yo've comed to th'
wrang shop, for brass is varry scarce here?"

"Aw've nobbut comed to see yor maister," aw sed; "is he in?"

"Nay, he isn't, an aw dooant know whear yo'll find him, for aw've niver met him yet; but if
it's awr Dave yo meean, he's inside, soa yo can walk forrad, an if it's onny shoes yo want
mendin', aw can see to that as weel as him, for he's reckonin' to be thrang this afternoon?"

"Aw've nobbut come to have a bit o' tawk," aw sed.

"Oh, if that's all yo can come in; there's a deeal moor fowk come to tawk to him nor what brings
him any wark; but it's happen as weel, for if it worn't for me bein' allus naggin' at him,
he'd nivver get done th' bit he does; an as it is, he's hammerin' away when he owt to be i'
bed, an' keepin' ivverybody else wakken; but aw've tried to taich him sense wol aw'm fair stall'd,
soa he mun goa his own gate an tak th' consequences. Come yor ways; we's find him i' th' far
raam makkin marks an' spoilin' cleean paper."

We went up a narrow passage, an as th' door wor oppen aw'd a gooid luk at David an his raam
befoor he saw me. It wor a varry little place, wi a varry little winder, an hardly heigh enuff
for a chap to stand up in, and all th' walls wor covered wi picturs, an he wor set cloise to
th' winder hard at wark at another. He wor a short, fat gooid-tempered-lukkin chap, wi a bald
heead an just a bit o' white hair hingin' daan like a fringe all raand, an his cheeks wor as
red as a ripe apple, an his hands, brooad an braan, show'd they'd had to face booath wark an
weather. As Dolly went in he lukt up an saw me.

"Come in," he sed, "come in do, it's varry whut, sit yo daan. Whativer browt ye up here to-day?
Why, yo'll be ommost melted. Can yo sup some buttermilk?" An he filled a glass 'at stood o'
th' table, an handed it to me. Aw swollered it, an then aw sed, "Aw thowt as aw'd a bit o'
spare time awd just come up an mak yor acquaintance, for awve heeard a gooid deeal abaat yo,
an happen yo'll nooan think onny war o' me for comin' bi misel'."

"Tha's done reight to come, lad; aw'm allus glad to see anybody pop in. Aw wor just thrang
makkin marks, as awr Dolly calls it, but, as awd nivver onybody to taich me, awm feeared aw
havn't getten th' reight way o' gooin abaat it yet. Yo see all theeas picturs? Well, yo'll
not think mich on 'em, but sich as they are, they please me, an they niver ait owt."

"An what are ta shappin at nah?" sed Dolly.

"This is to be th' erupshun o' Maant Vesuvius."

"Why, what is it eruptin' for?" sed Dolly. "Aw guess it's like thee, it's nowt better to do?
Is that th' reason tha's put so mich brimston' colour abaat it? Ther's nowt better nor brimston'
an traitle for curin' erupshuns."

"Dolly, aw've tell'd thee for aboon twenty year 'at tha's noa taste nobbut for summut to ait,
an yond lad tak's after thee. Aw'd allus a fancy for my lad to be an artist," he sed, turnin'
to me, "but he seems to care moor abaat hawkin' bits o' garden stuff; but then we am't all
born alike, an aw made up mi mind nivver to try to foorce him to owt 'at he'd noa hankerin'
after, for if aw'd had two trades to pick aght on, an one on 'em had been cobblin, awst ha
takken t'other whativver it had been; but aw could ha liked mi lad to ha been summut better,
for aw gave him a gooid name when he wor kursened; but yo cannot order theeas things as yo wod."

"Noa; an it's a gooid job yo cannot, for aw've quite enuff to put up wi to have thee messin'
abaat as tha does; but aw know varry weel that lad wod ha been a painter if tha'd had patience
to taich him. But whear's that pictur' he did paint? Tha'rt fond enuff o' shewin' thi own wark;
let's luk at somdy's else."

"He nivver tried his hand but once, an it wor this," he sed, as he' pooled one aght o' th'
corner, "an when he showed it me aw'd to luk at it for a long time befoor aw could tell what
to mak on it, but at last aw decided it wor a camel; but he wor soa mad 'at he sed he'd nivver
paint another so long as he lived, for it wor a drake. Soa, to prevent onybody else makkin
sich another mistak, aw've written on th' bottom' This is a drake."

"Tha can say what tha likes, David, but hawf a bad en, an if yo can nobbut catch leets, aw'm
sewer ther's monny a thing less like a drake nor that. Dooant yo think soa?" shoo sed, turnin'
to me.

Aw sed aw thowt soa, too: an then David axed me to goa into his study, "For yo mun know," he
sed, "aw've a study, an a studio, an a museum, an a wild beast show i, this haase, as little
as it is."

He led the way into another raam abaat as big as that we'd left, an showed me a row o' shelves
filled wi books, an a little table covered wi papers; an aw tell'd him aw thowt he wor quite
a literary sooart ov a chap.

"Why," he sed, "aw've allus been fond o' readin' sin aw wor a bit ov a lad, an sometimes aw
string a line or two together 'at jingles varry nicely, an two or three times aw've had some
printed i'th' papers. Mun, it's varry nice to be able to sit daan an eease yor mind wi writin'
a bit, even if nubdy reads it. That lad o' mine cares nowt abaat it; aw wish he did, for aw
believe if he'd takken to study he'd ha been a wonder, for he's a rare heead--it tak's a hat
ommost as big as a coil-skep to fit it. Aw gate him to try one time, an he wor a whole day
i' gettin' theeas four lines, aw allus keep 'em by me, for aw know he'll nivver write ony moor.":--

   'Aw once wor lost on Norland Moor,
       An' if aw'd ne'er been fun,
   Mooast likely aw'st a been thear yet,
       An nah mi tale is done.'

"Tha'rt varry fond o' runnin daan them 'at belangs to thee," sed Dolly, "an to hear thee tawk
fowk ud think he could nivver do owt reight; but if that isn't poetry, aw should like to know
what is, for awm sewer ther's a deeal more common sense in it nor ther is i' lots o' thine.
But thear he is gooin past th' winder, an he knows ther isn't a drop o' watter i' th' haase,
an aw can't bide to fotch ony. If he's like his fayther i' nowt else he is i' leavin' ivverything
for me to do; but aw'll let him see different!" an throwing th' winder oppen, shoo yell'd aght,
"Rubensrembrandtvandyke Drake! Tha'll come in this minit, or else aw'll warm thee!" An away
shoo flew aght.

"Whativver made yo call him sich a name as that?" aw axed.

"Why, aw'd a fancy he'd be a cliver chap if he lived, an soa aw gave him a cliver name; but
if aw had it to do nah, aw think summat less wad ha to fit him. But let's have a luk at th'
museum."

"Aw should like to hear one o' yor pieces," aw sed, "if yo'd be soa gooid as to reead one."

If that'll suit thee, aw'll reead one, an welcome.

   Aw've noa noashun o' writin' a line,
      Tho' aw've jist dipt mi pen into th' ink,
   Towards wor kin aw don't mich incline,
      An aw'm ommost to lazy to think.

"Weel, aw call that a varry nice piece; an if yo're aullus soa contented, yo must have a happy
time on it."

"Awm happy enuff as things goa, an aw dar say aw'm as contented as th' mooast; but it isn't
allus safe to judge ov a chap bi what he writes, for fowk often pen what they'd like things
to be nor what they find 'em to be."

He led th' way into another raam 'at wor filled wi boxes full o' butterflies, an buzzards,
an twitch clocks, an rare an praad he wor on 'em; an then he showed me what he called his wild
beeasts, but they wor tame enuff, for they wor nowt but catterpillers, but aw believe ther
wor thaasands on 'em, all alive an feedin o' one sooart o' stuff or another; an he tell'd me
they ait a barraload o' greens ivvery day. He said he kept 'em till they come into butterflies,
an then he cured 'em an sent 'em away to London an sometimes to Paris. Th' year befoor he sent
15,000 to one man. "Soa, yo see, awm a butterfly merchant as weel as a cobbler," he sed.

As we wor lukkin at 'em Dolly coom up to tell us we'd better goa to us drinkin' if we wanted
ony, for, as Rubensrembrantvandyke had started, ther'd varry sooin be nooan left. We tuk her
advice, an awm thankful to say ther wor plenty for us all, an when we'd finished we went an
sat ith garden, an David filled his pipe an sed if awd noa objections he'd tell me hah it happened
'at he coom to live oth moor, an th' reason fowk called him Owd Moorcock. Aw sed nowt could
suit me better, soa he began.

"Yo mun know," sed David, "'at befoor aw gate wed an coom to live here, aw lived in a little
haase in a fold cloise to Halifax Parish Church,--it isn't thear nah, for it's been pool'd
daan to mak way for improvements o' differernt sooarts,--an awd an idea at that time 'at aw
should like to live thear all mi life, an awd noa thowts aw should iver get wed."

"Its a pity tha ivver altered thi mind," said Dolly.

"Well, happen soa,--but let me tell mi tale i' mi awn way an it'll be finished soa mich sooiner.
One Setterdy aw donn'd misen up i' mi Sundy clooas an went for a walk throo th' market, an
when aw coom to th' butter-cross aw saw a chap 'at had a cock an two hens in a basket for sale,
an he offered 'em to me for ten shillin'. 'Ten fiddlesticks!' aw sed, 'awl gie thee five,'
an he put on a luk as if awd stab'd him to th' heart, an begun tellin' me hah mich they'd cost
him, an 'at he'd nivver ha tried to sell 'em but he wor behund wi his rent, an wor foorced
to pairt wi 'em to keep th' bums aght, an he assured me they wor layin' ivvery day. But th'
fact wor, aw didn't want 'em at onny price, for aw'd noa place to put 'em, an aw tell'd him
soa. 'Well,' he sed, 'gie me three hawf craans an tha shall have 'em, for aw think tha'll luk
weel after 'em an aw wodn't like 'em to be ooined.' 'Nay,' aw sed, 'aw weant gie aboon five
shillin', for awm nooan i' want on 'em.' 'If tha weant, tha weant,' he sed, soa that settles
it, but awd rayther let th' bums tak away nearly ivvery stick aght o'th' haase nor awd take
a farden less nor seven shillin'; that's th' lowest aw ivver will tak, an if tha doesn't buy'em
at that price tha'll rue, for tha'll niver have sich a chonce ageean.' 'Well, then, awst be
like to rue,' aw sed, 'for aw weant gie thee a hawpny moor nor five shilin'.' 'Tha'rt a hard
un,' he sed, 'but If tha'll promise me tha'll treat 'em weel, an at tha'll nivver tell anybody
what tha's gien for 'em, tha shall have 'em for six shillin'; nah, tha cannot say noa to that.
Two hens an' a cock! Why it's nobbut two shillin' a-piece, an they're as cheap as muck at hawf
a sovrin' aw think tha doesn't understand th' hen trade. Awm fair sham'd to offer' em at sich
a price, an awm sewer aw hardly dar goa hooam wi th' brass." 'Nay,' aw sed, 'one word's just
as gooid as a thaasand wi me, an awl stick to what aw sed, an if yo like to tak five shillin'
awl buy' em, an if net yo can keep' em.' 'Tak' em wi thee,' he sed; soa aw pottered aght five
shillin', an he began bawlin' 'Sowld agean' an aw had 'em under mi arms ommost afoor aw knew
what aw wor dooin, an as aw wor walkin' away he pool'd me to one side to luk at another basketful.
'Nah,' he sed, 'yo'd better buy theeas, yo can have 'em at th' same price, an they're better
nor them. Wod yo like a two-or-three ducks or a couple o' pigeons?' 'Aw want noa moor to-day,'
aw sed, 'but awst like to know if all theeas belang to yo?' 'All tha sees i' this row belangs
to me,' he sed, 'an if tha wants onny tha'll finnd me here ivery Setterdy, an awl sell thee
owt aw have at thi own price,' 'Well aw should think yo'll be able to keep th' bums off if
yo sell all them,' aw sed, an aw started for hooam, but somehah aw didn't feel just as weel
suited wi mi bargain as aw thowt aw should, an aw wor bothered aboon a bit wi wonderin' whear
to put 'em, for awd noa room for 'em nobbut ith cellar, an that wor as dark as a booit, but,
hahivver, aw thowt they'd be a bit o' company for me, for aw wor oft varry looansome, an aw
should be able to have a fresh egg for mi braikfast whenivver aw liked. As sooin as aw gate
hooam aw lit a cannel an went into th' cellar, takkin care to shut th' door after me, an then
aw unteed ther legs an set 'em at liberty. They worn't a varry prime lot, but aw didn't care
for that, for it wor th' eggs aw wanted. Th' cock gave hissen a shak, an set up sich a cock-a-doodle-doo
wol aw wor ommost deeafened--aw nivver heeard sich a voice i' mi life--if he'd been trained
he'd ha been a rare leeader for a rorytory--an wol aw wor wonderin' if it ud be safe to leeav
'em as they wor wol aw went to fotch 'em some screenins, one oth hens flew onto th' shelf whear
aw kept all mi jock an stuff. 'That'll niver do,' aw thowt, soa aw went towards it to tak it
off, when th' cock tried to foller, an wafted th' cannel aght wi his wings an let fair at th'
top o' my heead, so aw grabbed at th' shelf to steady misen, when daan it coom wi all th' plates
an pots, an sich a clatter an crash yo'd ha thowt th' haase had tummeld. Th' milk wor all spilt,
an th' breead an cheese wor rollin' amang th' coils, an a bowl o' broth had emptied itsen onto
th' front o' mi clean shirt, an aw wor sylin weet throo mi neck to mi feet. Th' hens wor chuckin'
i' different corners, an th' cock started crowin' laader bi th' hawff, an aw tried mi best
to groap mi way up th' steps into th' haase. Aw managed at last, an if yo could ha seen me
as' aw lukt just then, yo'd ha believed aw should niver be able 'to get cleean agean. Mi heead
wor covered wi mail, an mi clooas wor sooaked wi broth an ornamented wi bits o' chopt carrots,
an turnips, an onion skins, an hawf a pund o' butter wor stickin' to one booit heel an pairt
ov a suet dumplin' to t'other, an as aw wor standin' wonderin' which end to begin at to set
things straight, a young woman 'at lived next door coom in to ax me if awd been buyin' some
hens, for shoo'd heeard th' cock crowin', an when shoo saw me i' sich a pickle shoo held up
her hands an skriked as if awd getten mi throit cut. 'Whativver has ta been dooin?' shoo sed.
'Tha'rt fair flaysum to luk at.' Shut th' door, Dorothy,' aw sed, 'an come in an see if yo
can help me aght o' this mess;' soa she put th' door to, an aw tell'd her all hah it had happened.
'Why,' shoo sed, 'tha mun tak all thi clooase off, for they'll have to goa into th' tub-ther'll
nowt ivver get that greeas off but bailin' watter an weshin licker; goa upstairs an get 'em
all off an fling 'em daan to me, an awl see if aw can do owt wi 'em.' 'Awl pay yo whativver
yo charge,' aw sed, 'an if aw dooant screw yond cock an hens' necks raand it'll be becoss awve
changed mi mind!' 'O tha'll manage weel enuff wi 'em after this,' shoo sed, 'tha knows th'
hen trade is like ivverything else, it wants sombdy 'at understands it; but that cock's a rare
voice; is it a young un? Sithee, th' childer's standin' ith middle oth yard wonderin' wheal
th' noise comes throo.'

Aw went up stairs an tuk off all mi clooas an threw' em daan to Dorothy, an a grand lot they
lukt, an awd just pool'd on mi warty britches when shoo called aght, 'David, David! I come
this minnit! Th' childer's oppend th' cellar winder an letten th' cock aght!' Daan stairs aw
flew withaat stoppin' to festen mi gallowses or put mi booits on, an as sooin as aw went aght
th' lads set up a shaat an th' cock flew into a chamber winder at t'other side o' th' yard.
Th' naybors all coom runnin' aght, an Dorothy foller'd me wi mi clooas tukt under her arm,
an a shirt sleeve an a britches slop trailin' behund her. Aw ran into th' haase after th' cock,
an' withaat spaikin a word to Sam or his dowter, 'at wor just at ther dinner, aw baanced upstairs
and shut th' winder to mak sure 'at it couldn't get aght, an then aw called aght, 'It's nobbut
me, Sam, my new cock's flown into your window, an awve coom'd for it, wi ta help me to catch
it?' 'Why, has ta nobbut just getten aght o' bed? Aw think it ud seem thee better to put thi
clooas on befoor tha cooms runnin' into a body's haase this fashion, scarin' ivverybbody aght
o' ther wits.'

'Yo mun excuse me this time,' aw sed, 'its noa fault o' mine. Come an help me to catch this
chap.' Soa they booath coom up, but that cock had made up his mind net to be catched, an he'd
peearkt up fair at top oth bed heead, an he set up another crow wi as mich impudence as if
he'd been on his own middin. Sam made a grab at it, an it flew to th' winder-bottom, upsettin
two plant-pots, an we all made a rush for it, but it slipt past an swept all th' chany ornaments
off th' mantel-shelf an made a dive at th' chimley, an away it went aght oth seet. Th' lass
skrikt wi all her might, an Sam shaated, an aw made as mich din as aw could tryin' to keep
'em quiet, an th' cock screamed ith chimley wor nor a railway whistle. Bi this time ther wor
a craad o' thirty or forty fowk aghtside, an they wor callin aght for th' police, for they
seemed to think ther wor one or two gettin' murdered at least, an things began to luk serious.
'Tha'll have a bonny penny to pay for this,' sed Sam. 'Ha can ta feshun? Just luk at all them
ornaments brokken to bits, an th' plants an stuff destroyed! Tak that cock aght oth chimley
an get aght o' here as sharp as tha can, an nivver let me see thee nor owt belangin to thee
agean!' Aw sed nowt, for aw saw he wor riled, an aw didn't wonder at it, soa aw put mi hand
up th' flue, an aw could feel its legs, but it seemed to be wedged fast. 'It's here,' aw sed,
'but awm feeard aw can't get it withaat hurtin' it.'

'Ger aght oth gate,' he sed, 'aw care nowt abaat hurtin' it! Awl stir it, or else awl rive
it's legs off!' an he shov'd his arm up, an daan it coom an browt all th' sooit wi it, an flapt
it into us faces wol we wor ommost smoored.

Aw seized hoid oth burd an made th' best o' my way aghtside, an as sooin as aw showed mi face
ther wor a reglar yell, an they all squandered to let me pass. Th' chaps had getten pooakers
an tangs, an th' wimmen wor armed wi umbrellas an tooastin forks, an then aw turned raand an
axed 'em whot ther wor to do. Just then Sam an his dowter coom aght, an when they saw me ommost
undrest, wi mi face grimed wi sooit an mi heead whitened wi mail, an Sam an his lass lukkin
varry little better, it set some oth chaps laffin, an aw went inside an festened th' door,
an puffin' an blowin' like a brokken-winded horse, aw sat daan convinced 'at that chap wor
reight when he sed aw knew nowt abaat th' hen trade.

But th' noise aghtslde gate laader, an th' wimmen's voices wor raised to th' screamin' pitch,
soa aw ventured to luk aght, an' thear wor poor Dorothy ith middle ov a duzzen wimmen 'at wor
shakkin ther umbrellas an tooastin forks ovver her heead, wol one on em wor holdin' up mi Sundy
shirt, an other two wor tryin' to divide mi breeches between 'em, an ther wor sich a hullaballoo
as yo nivver heeard. 'Tha's war nor him bi th' hawf!' sed one. 'What business as shoo wi his
dooas under her arm, aw should like to know. It's a disgrace to ivvery woman ith fold, that's
what it is!' sed another; an aw began to see 'at that cock had been th' meeans o' gettin' her
into trouble as well as me.

Aw thowt th' best thing aw could do wor to leeave 'em to settle it amang thersen, soa aw went
an gate weshed an donned, an it seems bi th' time aw wor ready to goa aght they'd managed to
get hold oth reight end oth tale, an aw wor met wi a shaat o' laffin throo th' men, an even
th' wimmen smiled, tho' some on 'em shook ther heeads in a mysterious sooart ov a way, as mich
as to gie me to understand 'at they'd let me off that once, but if awd onny desire to keep
ther gooid opinion awd better net get into another scrape oth same sooart. Aw knew they threw
a gooid deal o' blame onto poor Dorothy, an aw wor varry sooary it wor soa, for shoo wor a
nice quiet young woman, an tewed hard to keep hersen respectable, an noabdy hed a word to say
agean her, nobbut shoo kept a tom-cat 'at worn't partiklar whooas dish he put his nooas in.

Aw nivver went near them hens agean wol Mundy mornin'. Aw knew they wor in a land flowing wi
broth an breead, but ther wor noa fear on me forgettin' 'em, for that cock crowed wol he wor
hooarse. Ther wornt one chap i' that fold 'at worn't up i' time for his wark o' Mundy mornin',
an as for misen awd hardly a wink o' sleep all th' neet.

Aw wor foorced to stop in all th' day o' Sundy, becoss o' mi clooas bein' at Dorothy's, an
when Mundy coom aw went daan ith cellar an cut' em all their heeads off, an detarmined to cook
'em all three an invite th' wimmen to ther drinkin', an see if aw couldn't mak things pleasant
ageean. Aw saw a nay bar hingin' up some clooas, soa aw tell'd her what aw intended to do,
an awd noa need to mention it to onnybody else, for th' news hed flown to ivvery haase i' less
nor five minnits.

Dorothy browt me mi clooas back o' Tuesdy, an they luk'd ommost as gooid as new, an aw invited'
em all to ther drinkin' for Fridy neet, an then aw went an bowt two pot dogs an a stag for
Sam's dowter, an aw wor luk'd on as th' king oth fold. It wor a varry little haase for abaat
twenty fowk, but aw cleared all aght, an put tables ith middle an cheers raand th' sides, an
contrived raam for 'em all. Aw dooant think yo ivver hed onny experience i' cookin' for yorsen,
nivver name cookin' for other fowk, but aw considered misen a varry gooid hand, an aw can assure
yo when aw stewed them hens an rooasted th' cock, an boiled some puttates, an made a pile o'
tooast, an some strong teah flavored wi rum, 'at it wor a set aght net to be despised.

All wor ready an promised for a success, an aw could see th' wimmen bobbin' aght o' one door
into another wi ther new caps on, an aw saw bi th' clock 'at it nobbut wanted a quarter ov
an haar befoor they'd be all thear, sea aw tuk a can an went to th' pump for some clean watter,
so as we could keep th' kettle filled up, an aw left th' door oppen. Aw wornt aboon a minnit
away, but as aw wor comin' back, what should aw see but that tom-cat o' Dorothy's comin' aght
oth door wi abaat hawf a hen in his maath. Away it ran hooam an me after it; net 'at aw cared
soa mich abaat th' loss oth mait, for aw knew we should hey enuff, but aw wor mad to think
'at after all mi trouble to cook it aw should be served i' sich a way.

Dorothy wor upstairs, an away it went to her, but aw didn't foller, for awd net forgetten th'
bother awd been in at Sam's; but wimmen's all alike, they can nivver keep ther maath shut,
an noa sooiner did shoo see it nor shoo set up a screeam an, ov coarse, that wor th' signal
for ivvery woman ith fold to fly aght, for they wor all set waitin' for th' time for ther drinkin'.
'Ger aght wi thee! Tha nasty thief!' shoo sed, an aw could hear her chasin' it raand an raand,
singin' aght, 'Ha can ta fashion, tha nasty gooid-fer-nowt? Awl hey thee hung for it befoor
tha'rt a day older!' Daanstairs it coom ageean, an aw oppen'd th' door an ran it aght, an as
aw foller'd it th' wimmen rushed past me in a body an all cried aght at once, 'What's he been
dooin to thee, Dorothy? Shame on him!' Aw went into mi awn haase, an left Dorothy to mak what
explanation shoo thowt best, for aw felt sewer aw should mak matters war if aw stopt. Aw dooant
know what shoo sed, but they sooin all coom in laffiin an tawkin, tho' nah an then throwin'
aght a sly hint at Dorothy an me, but aw wor too thrang to tak mich noatice, an' shoo'd moor
sense. As they wor all wed fowk but her an me, it wor agreed 'at shoo should sarve aght th'
teah, an' awd to sarve th' mait an stuff. They made a gooid deal o' fun, an th' braan creeam
helpt th' teah daan famously, th' tooast seem'd ommost to melt away, an th' stewed hens didn't
last long, but th' cock didn't seem to be in as mich favor. Noabdy wanted helpin' twice, an
as awd taen a deeal a' pains to cook it aw felt rayther disappointed. 'Nan get on an mak a
gooid drinkin',' aw says; 'does onnybody say a bit moor o' this cock?' But it wor all noa use,
aw axd 'em an axd 'em wol aw wor fair stalled, an th moor aw tried to persuade' em an th' moor
they laft.

'Just thee try a bit thisen,' sed one, 'an then tha'll see hah it is we want noa moor: Soa
aw tried a bit, an awl be blest if it wornt like gutty percha. Awd some varry gooid teeth,
but they could do nowt wi it. Aw wor varry soary abaat it, but it couldn't be helpt, an they
all sed they'd nivver had a better drinkin' i' ther life, soa one or two helpt me to side th'
table an straighten up a bit, for ther husbands wor all ta coom an hey a smook an a drop o'
summat short after they'd eoom throo ther wark.

'What mun aw do wi what's left o' this rooast cock?' aw sed.

'Give it to Dorothy's tom-cat!' sed Sam's dowter.

'If it gets its teeth fast it'll pull its heead off!' sed another.

'An mich matters if it did,' sed owd Sarah; 'for it's a plague i' this fold, for yo can keep
nowt aght ov it's rooad.'

'Aw think th' best plan ud be,' sed Sam, as he popp'd in his heead, 'for David an Dorothy to
mak it up between' em, an then we'll all join an give' em a weddin' dinner, for awm sewer ther
booath looansome, an as David's hed noa luck wi his poultry, an Dorothy's cat's allus getten
her i' trouble, aw think nah as yo've swallered th' poultry shoo should hang th' cat, an then
they could mak a fair start ith world, an aw believe ther isn't a nayhor 'at willn't gladly
give 'em a lift.'

'This seemed to fall in wi ivverybody's ideas except mine and Dorothy's, an we sed nowt. Th'
chaps coom in a bit, an a reight jolly lot they wor, an when th' wimmen tell'd 'em what a toff
owd customer th' cock hed turned aght, they sed it ud be a gooid name for me, soa they kursened
me Moorcock, an awve been known bi that name ivver sin. Yo'd hardly think' at Dorothy wod have
agreed to become Dolly Drake, but shoo did, an th' naybors wor as gooid as ther word, an when
we gate wed we sat daan to as grand a dinner as ivver yo'd wish to see, an monny a little thing
we have nah 'at wor gein to us then towards haasekeepin'.

"But some way or other soa monny fowk gate to know abaat her tom-cat, an they used to come
ta Iuk at it, far shoo wadn't hang it, an they made sich gam abaat it wol we coom up to this
quiet corner, pairtly to get aght oth gate on 'em, an pairtly becoss aw anlls liked th' country
best, soa here we are, just as yo see us, an here it's varry likely we shall stop till one
on us is fotched away in a black box. Th' owd tom-cat's deead, an aw stuffed it, an yo can
see it at top oth clock, so nah 'Yo know th' reason awm called 'Owd Moorcock.'"

"Ther's nivver noa end to thy tongue when it gets runnin'," sed Dolly: "th' supper's been ready
for long enuff, an if tha hasn't tawkt him booath hungry an dry bi this time he's able to stand
it better nor me."

We knocked th' ashes aght ov us pipes an went in to supper. It did'nt last long, an after thankin'
'em for ther hospitality an information aw shook hands an bid 'em gooid neet, an it'll be a
long time befoor aw forget mi visit to, "Owd Moorcock."

Peace Makkin.

"Honest confession is gooid for th' soul," they say, an aw may as weel confess at once 'at
awve been a fooil. Happen yo'll say "that's nowt fresh," but beggin' for pardon this is summat
fresh. Yo'll happen think 'at awve been bettin' at Donkeystir Races, or 'at awve been bun for
a chap in a money club, or 'at awve bowt a share in a manufacturin' company, limited, or 'at
awve started th' newspaper business, or takken a hotel, or 'at awve joined th' Mormons, or
'at awve getten into a law suit. But whichivver yo'd guessed yo'd be sewer to be 'wrang. All
awve been tryin' to do has been to act as a peeace makker, an if awd carried it on for onny
length o' time, aw should ha been made into sich a lot o' pieces misen 'at it wod ha takken
a besom to sweep me up.

Just anent awr haase lives a old cross-grained chap 'at's getten wed to a varry nice lass,
an' as he's a bit o' brass an' shoo's a lump o' beauty, yo'd think they should live together
as happy as two turtle doves. But awm sooary to say 'at sich isn't th' case, for they generally
get up abaat hawf-past eight an have a feight befoor nine. Awm a varry tender-hearted sooart
ov a customer, an awm sewer it's monny a time made mi heart bleed to see an hear ther goins
on. Somehah or other awd allus sided wi th' wife, tho' aw nivver knew what th' rows have been
abaat, an ov coorse soa long as they kept 'em i' ther own haase aw couldn't interfere. But
t'other day, abaat a wick sin, they wor gooin it war an war, an shoo coom runnin' into th'
street wi her hair all daan an her gaon ommost riven off her back, an he rushed aght after
her wi a umbrella in his hand, strikin' at her reight an left, all all shoo had to protect
hersen wi wor th' rollin' pin. Thinks aw to misen, this sooart o' thing has gooan far enuff,
an as awd just been readin' abaat th' "atrocities," aw fancied misen England an him Turkey
an her a poor Bulgarian, an aw determined awr wodn't see a poor inoffensive young woman ill-treated
bi a brute like that, soa just as he wor gettin' ready to strike her daan into th' eearth,
aw stept behund him an planted mi naive at th' back ov his ear, an he rolled ovver like a skittle
pin. Just as he fell awd an idea 'at awd been struck wi leetnin or else ther wor an eearthquake,
for a summat dropped onto mi heead wi sich a foorce 'at aw saw some oth grandest fireworks
awd ivver seen, an aw sat daan wi sich a bang 'at awm sewer aw must ha left mi impression pratty
deep somewhear. When aw began to collect mi scattered thowts aw saw her standin' ovver me quaverin'
th' rollin' pin aboon mi heead to prevent onnybody hittin' me ageean. When aw gate up aw began
to reason wi misen as to what had been to do, an aw couldn't help thinkin' 'at that rollin'
pin hed summat to do wi th' lump o' mi heead. Aw felt sooary  then 'at awd been soa rash as
to knock th' old chap daan, an aw went to beg his pardon an sympathise wi him.

"Shoo's a shocker," he sed, "ther's nubdy knows what aw have to put up wi. Shoo ill-uses me
throo morn to neet, an awm feeard o' mi life." Just then shoo made a dash at him as if shood
made up her mind to knock his heead cleean off, soa aw catched hold ov her arm an gave her
a swing raand 'at landed her just abaat th' same spot 'at awd left a minit befoor. Aw dooant
know whether ivver yo've been hit at top oth heead wi a old-fashioned umbrella or net, but
if yo have, yo know it's nooan a varry pleasant thing, for it seems to strike you i' three
or four places at once. Whether th' owd chap hit me in a mistak or he did it o' purpose awve
niver had th' chance to find aght, for things seem'd to get a gooid deeal mixt just abaat that
that time, an all aw know is 'at awve been i' bed for ommost a wick, an awm soa stiff yet wol
aw can hardly stir. One hawf o' mi heead is covered wi stickin' plaister, an awm covered wi
black an blue marks throo mi neck to mi knees. As aw sit at th' winder suppin' mi gruel, aw
can hear th' rows gooin on across th' street just as usual, an if they keep at it wol aw interfere
agean they willn't have to drop it just yet, for it's towt me 'at it's best to let fowk feight
ther own battles, for when it's nobbut one to one they've booath a chonce, but when it's two
to one it's vary oft rough for th' one.

Awr Emma--A False Alarm.

"Aw dooan't know what tha thinks abaat it, Isaac, but aw know ther's summat nooan reight. Aw
went to see awr Emma last neet, an' shoo doesn't luk a bit like hersen: an' if shoo hadn't
been rooarin' awl nivver trust mi een agean. It's some sooart o' bother shoo's havin' wi' yond
felly o' hers, depend on't. Aw warned her enuff befoar shoo gate wed, an' tawk'd to her wol
aw wor fair stall'd, but nowt 'ud do but shoo mud have him, an' if shoo hasn't getten her hands
full aw'm capt." 

Each is in charge of a door-keeper, whose duty it is to exclude improper personages. Along the
Twenty-third street side are suites of private apartments on the ground floor, occupied by permanent
boarders.

The various floors are reached by means of an "elevator," the first ever used in this country.
Similar arrangements are now in use in all the large hotels. The main stairway commences immediately
opposite the office. It is of white marble, and massive in its design. Ascending it the visitor
finds himself in a spacious hall, at one end of which is a corridor at right angles to this
hall. At the end nearest the stairs is the dining-room, a magnificent apartment. When the tables
are filled with a handsomely dressed throng of guests at the dinner hour, this room presents
one of the most brilliant sights that can be witnessed on the continent. The bill of fare comprises
literally everything that is in season. Back of the dining-room is the kitchen, an immense establishment.
Everything connected with it goes on like clock-work, however, so
perfect is the system upon which it is managed.

Beneath the kitchen are the machines for warming and ventilating the hotel. By means of these
a perfectly comfortable temperature is maintained in all parts of the house, and the smells of the
kitchen are kept out of the halls and chambers.

[Picture: FIFTH AVENUE HOTEL.]

At the end of the hall upon which the dining-room opens, are the parlors of the house. These
are among the most magnificent rooms in the country. They are furnished with great taste and
elegance, and their windows look out immediately upon Madison Square.

There are also several private parlors adjoining the public rooms. Along the Twenty-third and
Twenty-fourth street sides of the house are corridors, not quite so wide, but longer than the
main corridor, and leading off from it. The three constitute one
of the pleasantest promenades to be found.

The floors are covered with the richest carpets, into which the feet sink noiselessly. In the
day a half twilight prevails, and at night a rich flood of gaslight streams along their entire
length.

The upper floors are occupied with private parlors, rooms for guests, etc. There are in this
hotel pleasant quarters for 800 persons, and a greater number can be accommodated in case of
necessity.

There are 100 suites of rooms, besides the ordinary chambers. Each suite comprises a parlor, chamber,
dressing-room, bath-room and water-closet. The number of permanent
boarders is about 300.

The transient arrivals average about 300 per day, sometimes amounting to about twice that number.
The house is expensive, but its accommodations are unsurpassed, and if one can "get his money
back" anywhere in the city he can at this hotel.

The house is mainly patronized by people from other parts of the State, from New England, and
from the West. It is the most fashionable establishment in the city, and will doubtless hold
its present rank as long as its energetic proprietors retain the control of it.

Towards eight o'clock in the evening, the hotel presents its most attractive features. It is
full to overflowing. The lower halls, the reading and sitting-rooms are filled with well-dressed
men, guests and citizens, who have sauntered here from all parts of the city. Four-fifths
are smoking, and the air is hazy with the "vapor of the weed."

The hum of conversation is incessant, but the general tone is well-bred and courteous. In the
farther end of the great hall a group of stock brokers may be seen
comparing notes, and making bargains for the sale and purchase of
their fickle wares.

The clink of glasses makes music in the bar-room, and beyond this you may see the barbers at
work on their customers in the luxurious shaving saloon. Doors are opening and shutting continually,
people are coming and going. Porters are pushing their way through the crowd bearing huge
trunks on their shoulders. The office bell is sounding incessantly, from a dozen different
chambers at once, and the servants are moving about in every direction to execute the orders
of the guests.

On the floor above the scene is as animated, but of a different character.

Every one here is in full dinner dress, and all are on their good behaviour. The grand dining-room
is crowded with guests, who are doing ample justice to the sumptuous viands set before them.
The parlors are thronged with ladies and gentlemen, and the corridors
are filled with promenaders.

The toilettes of the ladies are magnificent, and they can be seen here to better advantage
than at any ball or evening party. You may see here some of the loveliest and most refined women,
and some of the coarsest and vulgarest, some of the most courtly gentlemen, and some of the
most insufferable snobs.

If you will join the quiet-looking man moving through the throng as if seeking some one whom he
cannot find, he can give you many an interesting bit of gossip about
the various persons whom you will encounter in your walk.

He is the detective of the house, and is on the watch for improper characters. Well-dressed
thieves will make their way into hotels in spite of the precautions of the proprietors. Here a guest
is comparatively safe. The detective is argus-eyed, and knows everybody. Let a pick-pocket
or thief but show his face in this place, and his arrest is sure. All night the corridors are
patrolled by watchmen to make sure of the safety of the sleeping guests. The house is absolutely
fire-proof.

The cost of conducting such an establishment is immense, but the profits are in proportion.
The average profit of this house is said to be about a quarter of a million of dollars per
annum.

The hotels that have been mentioned are all conducted on the American plan of full board, or
one charge for every expense. This enables a guest to calculate his expenses exactly, and has
many other advantages.

Many of the most fashionable houses are conducted on what is called "the European plan," in which
a separate charge is made for room, meals, and every service rendered. It is said that this is
more economical than the other plan, and that it is less profitable to the proprietors. It
is adopted by the Hoffman, St. Denis, Glenham, Brevoort, Coleman, St. James, Albemarle, Clarendon,
Everett, Grand, Gilsey, and several other prominent houses.

The leading hotels of the city lie very close together, the majority of them being in the vicinity
of Union and Madison Squares.

This is found to be an advantage, as strangers find it pleasant to visit friends who are staying
at other houses. The business of hotel keeping in New York is generally very profitable. A
large outlay is required at the opening of the house, for furniture, etc., as much as from $200,000
to $500,000 being expended on the fitting up of a first-class house. The furniture, plate, etc.,
of the Fifth Avenue and Grand Central Hotels are valued at the latter
sum for each establishment.

If the house meet with success, a moderate sum will suffice to supply
its current wants.

The business is all cash, and large amounts of money are received
daily.

The annual profits of the Fifth Avenue Hotel are said to be about
$250,000; those of the St. Nicholas about $200,000.

Other leading houses, when well managed, are said to clear about twenty per cent. on the sum invested.
Large fortunes have been made by not a few keepers of hotels in New York.

The large hotels depend entirely upon transient guests for their success. The city has, perhaps,
the largest floating population in America. Thousands come and go daily, even in the summer
months, and these are mostly persons who have money to spend.

Bridal parties are constantly arriving, and these are not inclined to be the most economical in
their expenditures. In the spring and fall, the Southern and Western
merchants come to New York in great numbers to buy goods, and are
among the best customers of the hotels.

Thousands, on business, and for pleasure, come and go daily, and
they all pour a constant stream of money into the coffers of the hotels.

The

smaller houses, while they compete with their great rivals for transient
custom, rely chiefly upon their permanent guests.

These are filled with families who have come to them to avoid the
trouble of keeping house, and who remain all through the fall, winter,
and spring.

In the summer they go to the watering places, so that they pass their
whole lives in hotels.

They are mostly persons of wealth and fashion.

As may be supposed, the atmosphere of a hotel is not very favorable
to domestic privacy, and such establishments are vast manufactories
of scandal.

People imagine that they are living privately, but their every action
is subject to the inspection and comment of the other inmates of the
house.

The hotels are not the safest places for the growth of the domestic virtues. Indeed, it may
be said that they furnish the best means of destroying them entirely. Neither are they the best
place for the training of children. This last, however, may be a minor consideration, for the
wives who live at the hotels seem, as a rule, to take care that there
shall be no children to need training.

Small families are a necessity at such places, and they remain small
in that atmosphere.

If another Asmodeus could look down into the hotels of New York,
he would have some startling revelations to make, which would no doubt
go far to corroborate the gossip one hears in the city concerning
them.

The proprietors of the city hotels are very active in their efforts to exclude improper characters
from their houses, but with all their vigilance do not always succeed in doing so. One is never
certain as to the respectability of his neighbor at the table, and it is well to be over-cautious
in forming acquaintanceships at such places. Impure women of the "higher," that is the more
successful class, and gamblers, abound at the hotels.

The proprietor cannot turn them out unless they are notorious, until they commit some overt act,
for fear of getting himself into trouble.

As soon, however, as his attention is called to any improper conduct on their part, they are
turned into the street, no matter at what hour of the day or night.

Hotel proprietors are also the victims of adventurers of both sexes.

These people live from house to house, often changing their names
as fast as they change their quarters, and they are more numerous
than is generally believed.

One man who made himself known to the police in this way, used to take his family, consisting
of a wife and three children, to the hotels, and engage the best rooms. When his bill was presented,
he affected to be extremely busy, and promised to attend to it the
next day.

By the next day, however, he had disappeared with his family. His trunk, which had been left behind,
was found to contain nothing but bricks and rags, or paper.

Another adventurer would put up at the most fashionable hotels, and when requested to pay his
bills would feign madness.

He would rave, and sing, and dance, call himself Nebuchadnezzar, or George Washington, or some
such personage, and completely baffle the detectives, who were for
a long time inclined to believe him a bona fide madman.

In this way he ran up a bill of one hundred and seventy-one dollars at the Fifth Avenue Hotel,
which he never paid.

Others do not seek to obtain lodgings at the hotels, but confine their
efforts to securing meals without paying for them.

They get into the dining-rooms along with the crowd at the meal hour, and once in and seated
at the table are generally safe.

Some two years ago as many as thirty-four of this class were detected at the Fifth Avenue
Hotel in a single month.

These men as they leave the dining-room generally manage to secure
a better hat than that they deposited on the stand in entering.

Under the regime of the Lelands, the Metropolitan Hotel had a colored man stationed at the door
of its dining-room, who proved more than a match for the most expert
thief.

All first class hotels keep private detectives and watchmen on duty at all hours. The business
of these men is to keep guard over the upper part of the house, to prevent thieves from entering
and robbing the rooms of the guests.

Suspicious persons are at once apprehended, and required to give
an account of themselves.

Some queer mishaps often befall guests of the house who are not known to the detectives.

Bold robberies are often effected at the hotels of the city.

Some time ago a thief was captured at the St. Nicholas, and upon
being searched a gold watch and chain, and five different parcels
of money were found upon him, all of which were identified by guests
as their property.

XVIII. IMPOSTORS.

There is no city in the Union in which impostors of all kinds flourish
so well as in New York.

The immense size of the city, the heterogeneous character of its population, and the great
variety of the interests and pursuits of the people, are all so many
advantages to the cheat and swindler.

It would require a volume to detail the tricks of these people, and some of their adventures
would equal anything to be found in the annals of romance.

All manner of tricks are practised upon the unsuspecting, and generally the perpetrator escapes
without punishment.

They come here from all parts of the country, and indeed from all parts of the world, in the
hope of reaping a rich harvest, and the majority end by eking out
a miserable existence in a manner which even the police who watch
them so closely are sometimes unable to understand.

They find their way into all classes. One cannot mingle much in society here without meeting some
bewhiskered, mysterious individual, who claims to be of noble birth. Sometimes he palms himself
off as a political exile, sometimes he is travelling, and is so charmed with New York that he
makes it his headquarters, and sometimes he lets a few friends into the secret of his rank,
and begs that they will not reveal his true title, as a little unpleasant affair, a mere social
scandal in his own country, made it necessary for him to absent himself for a while. He hopes
the matter will blow over in a few months, and then he will go home. The fashionable New-Yorker,
male or female, is powerless against the charms of aristocracy. The "foreign nobleman" is
welcomed everywhere, feted, petted, and allowed almost any privilege he chooses to claim--and
he is far from being very modest in this respect; and by and by he
is found out to be an impostor, probably the valet of some gentleman
of rank in Europe.

Then society holds up its hands in holy horror, and vows it always did suspect him. The men
in society are weak enough in this respect; but the women are most frequently the victims.

Not long since, a handsome, well got up Englishman came to New York on a brief visit. He called
himself Lord Richard X---. Society received him with open arms. Invitations were showered
upon him. Brown's hands were always full of cards for his Lordship. The women went wild over
him, especially since it was whispered that the young man was heir
to a property worth ever so many millions of pounds.

In short, his Lordship found himself so popular, and hints of his departure were received with
such disfavor by his new found friends, that he concluded to extend his stay in New York indefinitely.
He made a fine show, and his toilettes, turnouts, and presents were magnificent. The men did
not fancy him. He was too haughty and uncivil, but the ladies found him intensely agreeable.
It was whispered by his male acquaintances that he was a good hand at borrowing, and that he
was remarkably lucky at cards and at the races. One or two of the large faro banks of the
city were certainly the losers by his visits. The ladies, however, were indignant at such stories.
His Lordship was divine. All the women were crazy after him, and any of them would have taken
him at the first offer.

By and by the newspapers began to take notice of the young man, and boldly asserted that there
was no such name as Lord Richard X--- in the British peerage. Society laughed at this, and
declared that everybody but ignorant newspaper men was aware that the published lists of titled
personages in England were notoriously incomplete.

Meanwhile, his Lordship played his cards well, and it was soon announced that he was "to be
married shortly to a well-known belle of Fifth avenue." The women were green with jealousy,
and the men, I think, were not a little relieved to find that the lion did not intend devouring
all the Fifth avenue belles. The marriage came off in due season; the wedding-presents fairly
poured in, and were magnificent. The new Lady X--- was at the summit of her felicity, and was
the envied of all who knew her. The happy pair departed on their honeymoon, but his Lordship
made no effort to return home to England.

During their absence, it leaked out that Lord X--- was an impostor. Creditors began to pour in upon
his father-in-law with anxious inquiries after his Lordship, against whom they held heavy accounts.
Proofs of the imposture were numerous and indisputable, and the newspapers declared that Lord
X--- would not dare to show his face again in New York. Everybody was laughing at the result
of the affair.

What passed between the father-in-law and the young couple is not known; but the bride decided
to cling to her husband in spite of the imposture. Father-in-law was a prudent and a sensitive
man, and very rich. For his daughter's sake, he accepted the situation. He paid Lord X---'s
debts, laughed at the charge of imposture, and spoke warmly to every
one he met of the great happiness of his "dear children, Lord and
Lady X---." On their return to the city, he received them with a grand
party, at which all Fifth avenue was present, and, though he could
not silence the comments of society, he succeeded in retaining for
his children their places in the world of fashion. He was a nabob,
and he knew the power of his wealth. He shook his purse in the face
of society, and commanded it to continue to recognize the impostor
as Lord X---, and society meekly obeyed him.

Impostures of this kind
do not always terminate so fortunately for the parties concerned.
New York gossip has many a well-authenticated story of foreign counts
and lords, who have set society in a flutter, and have married some
foolish, trusting woman, only to be detected when it was too late
to prevent the trouble. Well, Jim didn't spaik for he thowt "the leeast sed an th' soonest mended."
But shoo wornt to be done, shoo at it ageean in another tone--"Eea, aw feel awm gettin waiker--Waiker
ivery day; does ta hear what aw say?" "Hear thi," he sed, "mi ears are hoof'd wi harkenin to
thi." "Eea, an they shall be hoof'd," shoo sed, "for as long as awve breath i' my body awl
tell thi o' thi faults. Ha can ta fashion; but if tha doesn't alter awl niver put legs daan
i' bed wi' thee agean I Shame o' thisen! but tha has na shame; tha'rt as brazzen as brass,
that's what tha art!" "Nah, hold thi noise," he sed. "Sithee, aw've browt thi a bottle o' whisky;
mun, awm allus thinkin on thi." "Dooant tell me sich like tales as them, for aw dooant believe
thi," shoo says, "tha thinks tha can get ovver me wi a bottle o' whisky aw daresay, but tha'rt
mistakken; an' aw dooant know whear tha's getten that at this time oth' mornin."

Jim kept a still tongue in his bead an' crept quietly into bed, an' it worn't long befoor they
wor booath asleep.

Nah, it wor varry near time for th' polieeman to come to wakken Broddington, an' as he knew
nowt abaat th' flittin he luck'd up at th' sign, an' feelin sure at he wor at th' reight shop
he gave a varry gooid rat-a-tat at Clarkson's door.

"What's that?" sed his wife, jumpin up; "go daan and see."

"Net aw," sed Clarkson, "its nobbut some druffen chaps 'at's on for a spree."

"Eea, an they know whear to come it seems! A'a, if aw wor a man aw should shame to have sich
like followin me."

Another rat-a-tat followed, but Clarkson wor detarmined not to get up, an' th' policeman wor
just as detarmined to pail at th' door till he did get up. Rat-a-tat! rat-a-tat! went his stick
time after time, wol at last old Clarkson baanced aght o' bed an threw up his winder, an' axed
what he wanted; but when he saw a blue coat an' shinin buttons, he turned raand to his wife
an' sed, "It's a bobby."

"Why," shoo says, "ax him what he wants."

"What does ta want?" sed Clarkson.

"Nah, then, is noa gooid tryin' to mak it strange; tha knows aw've come here for that whisky,
an' awmean to have it befoor aw goa."

"O, that's it, is it?" sed his wife. "That's thee 'at's browt me th' whisky? It's grand to
bring a wife whisky an' ax a policeman to come sup it."

"Aw niver ax'd onybody to come, aw dooant know what he wants."

"That's a varry nice tale, lad, but tha willn't mak me believe it; aw know better nor a policeman
comin toa haase at hauf-past three ith mornin if he hadn't been sent for."

Rat-a-tat! rat-a-tat-tat! went th' policeman's stick, an old Clarkson flew to th' winder an
shaats aght, "What th' d---- does ta want?"

"Nah, it's noa gooid thee puttin on an' makkin it all strange; tha mud as weel come daan sooin
as lat, for tha'll ha to goa wi me an' th' whisky an' all, soa on wi them britches an come
daan stairs."

"Nah, Clarkson," sed his wife, sittin up i' bed, "tell me th' truth at once; has ta getten
that whisky honestly or net? If tha hasn't say so, an then awst know what to expect. Aw allus
sed 'at tha'd bring me an th' childer to some end if this rakin aght ov a neet went on. A'a
'at ivver aw should ha lived to see this day!" An then shoo began rockin hersen backards an
forrads, an moppin up her tears wi th' corner oth sheet.

Yo may guess what a din th' policeman made when it wakkened Broddington 'at lived six or eight
doors off, an aght o' ommust ivvery winder ith row ther wor neetcaps bobbin in an aght, an
some on 'em shook ther heeads an sed, "It's nobbut what aw expected; awve thowt many a time
'at if Clarkson could afford to dress his wife 'i silks an satins, 'at it didn't all come aght
o' th' puttaty trade," an after that feelin remark they went back to bed.

Broddington gate up an dressed an went daan stairs to see what wor up. All at once he bethowt
him abaat th' policeman, an th' fact a' th' wrang sign being ovver th' door, an he saw at once
what a mistak had been made. "Well, it can't be helped," he sed, "but poor Clarkson 'll catch
it aw'll bet." Soa he went daan an oppened th' door just at th' same time at Clarkson wor comin
aght. When th' policeman saw Clarkson come aght an Broddington abaat twenty yards off, he luk'd
a trifle soft, an after starin furst at one an then at t'other, he gave vent to his astonishment
bi sarin, "Blow me tight!" Just then Mrs. Clarkson's heead show'd aght o' th' chamber winder,
"O, it's all varry fine," shoo sed, "aw see ha it is; it's a made up doo throo th' beginin
to th' endin; but awl have an alteration as sure as my name's Liddy:" After sayin this shoo
popt back agean an went to bed, noa daat thinkin 'at shoo wor a varry ill used woman. As matters
had getten to this pitch, Broddington tuk th' policeman an' Clarkson on to his haase, an after
a gooid deeal a explanation, ivery body seem'd to be satisfied, an Broddington browt aght a
bottle an put it i' th' middle o' th' table an invited 'em to help thersen. They did, an readily
too, for th' policeman worn't a teetotaler, (an ther's summat abaat that 'at aw could nivver
understand, for teetotal lecterers tell us 'at if all th' world wor teetotal 'at we should
have noa murders, noa robberies, noa rows, all wod be peace an happiness an th' millenium be
ushered in, an yet aw nivver met a teetotal policeman, tho ther may be sich like things, th'
same as aw've heeard on ther bein white blackburds, an we know 'at policemen are th' varry
chaps 'at have to keep th' peace.)

Well, glass followed glass, an Broddington decided net to set off at all, but to spend a friendly
haar wi 'em, as he'd been th' cause ov a deeal o' bother, an he thowt th' best thing he could
do wod be to apologize like a man an set things straight agean. Soa they all turned aght together
at about a quarter to ten to goa to Clarkson's, but when they gate aght o' th' door what should
they see but a lot o' furniture aghtside, an all th' appearances ov another flittin. "What's
up nah, Clarkson?" sed Broddington. "Nay, aw dooant know," he sed, "but it seems to me 'at
th' wife's sellin up, an shoo's sed shoo wod do monny a time; but awl put a stop to that, an
sharply too." Away he went in a reglar tiff, an wanted to know who'd fotch'd his stuff aght
o' th' haase, an sed he'd let' em see who wor th' maister thear. When his wife coom shoo wor
fair maddled, an wanted to know what wor up. "Who's tell'd thee to sell th' furniture," he
sed. "Sell th' furniture! Who is selling th' furniture, fooil! It's nobbut me 'at had it taen
aght to cleean, becoss aw thowt tha wor off for th' day, an aw thowt awd do it before tha come
back, sea as tha wodn't be put abaat wi th' bustle." "O, that's all reight," he sed. "Aw see
nah; aw hardly thowt tha'd do as ill as that, though tha wor awful crusty this mornin; but
ther's Broddington an th' policeman aghtside 'at want to come in an explain matters a bit."
"Dooant bring' em here," shoo sed, "tha's been wi them to oft; it's sich like as them 'at's
leeadin thee off."

"Well, we'd better have 'em in aw think, an hear what they've to say," he sed. Soa they went
in, an when they'd tell'd th' tale shoo laff'd as hard as any on 'em, for shoo worn't a bad
bottom'd woman though she had a tongue; soa after makkin all things straight shoo ax'd' em
to have a drop o' summat, which they had, an as shoo sed, "Drink o' ony sooart wor a thing
'at shoo seldom or iver touched, though th' doctors had ordered it for her, time after time,
yet considerin 'at Broddington had missed his cheap trip, an 'at all matters had been put to
reights, shoo made hersen a drop o' whisky an hot watter, an as they sat tawkin an smookin
they coom to th' conclusion 'at it wor nivver safe to judge bi appearances. Clarkson wor soa
pleased at his wite takkin it i' sich a philosophical way, wol he bowt her a new gaan, an when
th' naybors saw her turn aght in it th' next Sunday, they nodded an smiled at her as if they
could like to put her into ther pockets, but as sooin as shoo'd turned her back they curl'd
ther nooas an turned up th' whites o' ther eyes, an sed, in a varry mysterious way, "It'll
do woll it lasts."

A'a dear I tak my advice an nivver trust to appearances.

Mi First Testimonial.

Young Gawthorp lived at t'Cat-i-t'well; some on yo may know him, he used to come to Halifax
twice i' th' wick to buy his greens and stuff to hawk, an' he allus call'd at t'Tabor to get
a pint as he went hooam.

Nah Chairley (his mother had kursen'd him Chairley becoss shoo wor sittin in a chair th' furst
time shoo saw him); well, Chairley worn't like some country hawbucks at fancied' coss he sell'd
puttates an turnips, 'at he needed no mooar knowledge nor to be able to tell th' difference
between a parsnip an' a manglewurzell. Noa, Chairley had an inquirin' mind, an' if it hadn't
been at one leg wor shorter nor t'other, he'd a been a sowdger, for his heart wor as brave
as any greengrocer's heart cud be expected to be.

One neet he'd been to th' taan, an' wor trudgin hooam beside owd Testy--that's his donkey's
name, an' aw owt to tell yo hah it happen'd to be call'd Testy; ther's nowt like explainin'
things as we goa on. Chairley used to goa to th' Sunday Skooil, an' he wor allus soa weel behaved,
an' hardly ivver missed a Sunday withaat bringin' his taicher awther a apple or toffy or summat,
wol th' Superintendant took sich a fancy to him, 'at he determined to get up a testimonial
for him; soa one day he call'd him to one side, an' strokin' his heead as tenderley as if it
wor a whin bush, he sed, "Chairley tha's been a gooid lad, an' we ar detarmin'd to get up a
testimonial for thi. Aw've mentioned it to th' taichers, an' they've all agreed to subscribe,
an aw want thee to say what shape it shall tak." "Well," said Chairley, "if aw'm to pick, aw
should like it to be as near th' shape o' Tim Hardy's as yo can get."

"What dusta meean?" sed th' Superintendent.

"Aw mean Tim Hardy's donkey."

"Nay Chairley, that'll nivver do for a Sundy skooil to give a donkey for a testimonial; that
wodn't spaik weel for th' skooil--think ageean lad."

"Ther's nowt else at aw'd like, soa if yo cannot gie me that, it matters little to me what
aw get; an' as for net spaikin weel for th' skooil, aw dooan't see that; Balaam's ass spake
varry weel for him, an' aw dooan't see but what one mud spaik varry weel for th' taichers." 

He proposed to spend his meal-times, during the rationless and moneyless days of March, reading
the correspondence; quite enough to engage a man's whole attention during at least that period.

April
1st, 1916, duly arrived, and with it the renewal of the Sergeant's food question, "What, again?"
I asked, irritably.

But the Field Cashier, who was first approached on April 3rd, wasn't
in the least irritated.

The subject interested him from the start. Moreover, argumentative by nature though he undoubtedly
was, he was all anxiety to pay. First, however, there were one or two trifling formalities to
be observed. "You see," he explained, "I can only pay out upon an authority."

With some confidence and no little pride we opened our despatch-case
and produced our correspondence.

He read every word of it; his pay corporal did the same, and very kindly explained it to us
all as he went along. "This," they agreed, "is your authority to get the money. What I want
is an authority to pay it." With expressions of mutual esteem we parted for the day, agreeing
to give the matter our most earnest consideration during the week which must elapse before his
return for the next pay-day.

We spent a busy week interviewing the forty-nine officers and anyone
else we could get to listen.

Only from the Camp Commandant did we get anything approaching enthusiasm. Camp Commandants are
men of a patient disposition and a never-failing sympathy; what is better still, they invariably
possess a Sergeant-Major of unscrupulous if altruistic cunning. We presented ourselves at
the pay-office, on April 10th, armed with every possible form of literature, over the Camp Commandant's
signature, which any reasonable Field Cashier could possibly want to read.

The Field Cashier was very pleased to see us; we were very pleased
to see him.

It was a most happy reunion. Only the Command Paymaster's presence was wanted to make the thing a
success. The Field Cashier gave his address, dispensed with the Sergeant's presence at all future
meetings, and postponed all further proceedings in the matter till April 17th.

If there was any lack of graciousness in the correspondence with the C.P.M., this was, I must
at once say, on my side.

He wanted to oblige, but, being human, he must have his authority.
I sent him the authority to get and the authority to pay. His reply
was to the effect that both were perfectly delightful and in the very
best taste, but what was wanted before he could authorize payment
was an authority to have the account in England credited with the
necessary fund.

For the first time in my life I positively loathed
England.

Bit by bit, however, the C.P.M. softened; but he hadn't
softened quite enough to satisfy our Field Cashier by April 24th. Well, as aw wor sayin' Chairley an' Testy wor gooin' hooam an' bed just getten
to th' Tabor, when they booath stopt for a drink. He teed up his donkey an' then went into
th' tapraam for a pint a fourpny, (yo can get varry gooid fourpny at t'Tabor, ther's some body
in it an noa sperrit, hah they brew it is a saycret, an' it's noa use tryin' to see throo it.)
Just anent Chairley sat an owd sowdger tellin' tales abaaght different battles he'd been in,
an' Chairley lizened to ivvery word as if it wor gospel, for ov cooarse he knew at noa man
'ats been in a battle wad say owt at worn't true, an' at last he sed, "Captin' aw've oft thowt
aw should like to be sowdger, but yo see mi legs isn't booath just t'same length."

"That'll mak little difference," he sed, "tha'd be all th' better for that, it wodn't be as
easy to put a bullet throo thi heead when it wor bobbin' up and daan, as it wod a chap at walk'd
straight; but aw should advise thee to join th' artillery, that's th' regiment for thee; horse
artillery, that's the ticket, tha'd just doo for that."

"Dun yo think aw should?"

"To be sewer, tha'rt just made for it."

This set Chairley a thinkin', an after treatin' th' owd sowdger wi' a pint, he set off hooam.

As he'd noab'dy else to tawk to' he tawk'd to th' donkey.

"Well Testy, what dus ta think abaaght it? Dus ta think aw should doo for a hartillery chap?
They dooant have donkeys i'th' horse hartillery, or else awd tak thee. What are ta shakin'
thi heead at? Well if aw doo goa, iwl mak a present o' thee to th' Sunday skooil, for aw cudn't
tell what price to put on thi if aw wanted to sell thi. Hahivver, aw think it ud be a gooid
thing for me to practiss a bit, an' awve two owd muskets at hooam at can be made come in, an'
awl get up it' mornin' i' gooid time an practiss for an haar or soa befooar we start for bizness.
It'll doo us booath gooid."

Chairley gate hooam, an' after stablin' Testy an' makkin him cumfortable, he gave him a bit
o' extra corn to mak him lively next mornin'. He left t'stable sayin, "Well Testy, aw nivver
thowt a makkin a war-horse aght o' thee, tho' awve seen war horses nor thee; but to morn tha'll
have to be a chairger, an' if tha'rt hauf as gooid a chairger as t'chap wor at sell'd thi to
th' Superintendent, tha'll doo to practiss on."

T'next mornin' Chairley gate his two muskets, an havin' teed one on th' top o' each pannier,
he maanted Testy, an' rooad him to a croft at back o' th' haase.

"Nah," he says to hissen, "hah can aw pull these triggers when aw'm set up here? It caan't
be done; but if aw lig on my belly on th' top of his back, aw can raich 'em then, an that'll
be a better position to escape th' enemy." Soa he ligg'd his full length o' Testy's back, an
tuk hold o' booath muskets wi' his fingers on th' triggers. "Nah Testy, see tha behaves thisen'
for this may be a turnin' point i' thy life as weel as mine. Tha'll ha' to get used to th'
smell o' paather, same as me. Nah for it," he sed, an' he shut his een an' whisper'd, "one,
two, three--off!" He pooled booath triggers, booath muskets went off, an' Chairley went off
at th' same time, an' soa did one o' Testy's ears, an' when Chairley lukk'd up Testy wor stanin'
on his fore legs, sparrin' away wi' his heels, as lively as yo'd wish to see. Chairley maniged
to sam hissen together, an' findin' at he worn't killed, he went to mak friends ageean wi'
Testy; an' if ivver ther wor two disconsolate lukkin' jackasses i' this world, it wor them two.

"Well, this is a bonny come off," he sed, "tha'rt a bigger donkey nor aw tuk thi for. Had ta
noa mooar sense nor to put thi ear i'th' front ova gun. Tha cud a heeard it goa off withaat
lizenin' soa clois?

"Well, aw wish tha wor nicely aght o' mi hands. What to do wi thi nah aw connot tell, unless
aw cut off t'other ear to match, an' tee a bunch o' horsehair to thi tail an' see if aw connot
mak a galloway aght on thi; an' if aw doo that, aw expect tha willn't be able to keep thi maath
shut, an' that voice o' thine 'll let ivvery body know. But hahivver aw mun try an' bandage
that heead o' thine up an' then see what aw can do, for ther'll be noa hawkin' to-day, an'
noa mooar hartillery practiss."

Chairley weshed th' donkey's heead, an' put some sauve on to his ear, an' teed it up as weel
as he cud, an' then turned him inta th' croft an' sat daan wonderin' hah to spend th' day.

Nah ther wor nowt Chairley wor fonder on nor kite flyin', an' as he had a kite ommost as big
as hissen, he thowt he mud as weel amuse hissen a bit; soa he fotched it, an' befooar monny
minnits it wor sailin' away up i'th' air. He kept givin' it mooar band wol it wor ommost aght
o' seet, an' beein' a breezy day, it pooled soa hard at he cud hardly hold it.

To mak matters war, Testy wor varry restless, an' kept wanderin abaaght, an' as ther wor noa
gate to th' croft, Chairley had to follow him for feeard on him gettin' away. In a while it
began to be rayther hard wark, he darn't let t'kite goa, an' ther wor nowt handy to tee it
too, soa he thowt his best plan 'ud be to pull it in, but just then a thowt struck him, as
he saw Testy trottin' off whiskin his tail, an' he went after him. As sooin as he'd catched
him, he teed his kite band to th' donkey's tail, sayin' as he did soa, "Nah aw can watch yo
booath at once." But yo shud a seen that donkey! At first he ran backards for abaaght a dozzen
yards, then he shot aght his heels wi' twenty donkey paar; but it wor noa use tryin' to kick
that kite, he cud just as easy ha' kicked t'mooin. He tried to turn raand, but that ommost
twisted his tail off, then he planted his feet firmly i' t'graand, wi his tail stickkin' straight
aght like a brooish stail, an' luk'd at Chairley, as if for some explanation.

"Well, hah dusta like kite flyin', Testy? tha'd a rooar'd thi 'een up afooar tha'd thowt a
that. It's plain to be seen at tha connot run away wi' that kite, an' th' kite connot flyaway
wi' thee, soa awl leeave yo an' goa get a bit a dinner."

He worn't long away, but when he coom back, noa kite cud he see, but theear wor Testy stud
just as he'd left him. As Chairley walked to him he nivver sturd, but, fancy his surprise when
he saw at th' donkey's tail wor missin'. It had dissolved partnership wi' Testy an' gooan to
realms aboon. Maybe it'll fessen it sen on to some little star an' mak a comet on't.

Chairley an Testy stud lukkin' at one another for a gooid five minnits, an' at last Chairley
sed, "Well Testy, tha caan't blame me; aw dooant think thi appearance is mich improved, but
still, tha must admit at tha arn't as mich of a donkey nah as tha wor when aw gate tha. It
seems to me we'd better pairt, for we dooan't get on soa weel together; awl sell mi stock an't
panniers, an' thee an ivverything; aw shall ha' to sell' em wholesale though, for aw cannot
re-tail thee. But awl promise tha one thing, whenivver aw fly a kite ageean, awl remember mi
donkey's tail."

Just then, Testy's knees begun to tremmle, his body rock'd from side to side; he luk'd at Chairley
as mich as to say, "assassin," an rowled ovver brokkenhearted; an', withaght a struggle, he
breathed his last sigh to th' tune of "Good bye, Chairley, when aw'm away, dunnot forget your
Testimonial."

Five Paand Nooat.

Aw remember th' first time at aw iver had a five paand nooat, an' awm like as if aw can see
it yet. It worn't a new en, it wor one 'at had gooan throo a gooid monny hands,--it wor soft
an' silky to th' touch, an' it wor yeller wi age, an' th' edges wor riven a bit, an it had
a split up th' middle, whear it had been cut i' two at some time an' stuck together agean wi
a bit o' postage stamp paper. Aw remember at that time aw used to sleep up in a garret, all
bi mysen, an' th' walls wor covered wi bits o' pictures, an' shelves wor stuck up here an'
thear, filled wi bottles o' all maks o' stuff, an' aw'd an old box 'at aw could lock up whear
aw kept some pipes an bacca, an' owt else at aw darn't let awr fowk know 'at aw had, an' carefully
put away under th' bed wor another little box whear aw kept cannels. Awm just th' same as if
aw can see mysen nah, as aw wor then, sat daan oth edge oth bed an' th' five paand nooat on
th' table anent me, studdyin what to buy. She has to buy fuel in the winter, and kindling wood
costs her three cents a bundle and coal fifteen cents a pail. Perhaps she has children, or a
sick and helpless, or, worse still, a drunken husband to provide for. All out of her beggarly wages.
Her food consists almost entirely of bread and potatoes, and sometimes she treats herself
to the luxury of a cup of tea without milk or sugar. If she owns a sewing machine, and very few
do, she can earn more than one who sews by hand, but constant work at the machine means a
speedy breaking down of her health and a lingering death, or a transfer to the charity hospital.

Small
as are her wages, the working woman is not always sure of receiving them. Some rascally employers--and
one of the institutions to be mentioned further on, could give a long list of them--will, upon
receiving the work, find fault with the sewing, and either deduct a part of the poor creature's
wages for the alleged fault, or refuse point blank to pay her a cent. Others again will demand
a deposit equal to the value of the materials taken home by the sewing women. Upon the return
of the completed work, they will not only refuse the promised payment, alleging that the work
is badly done, but will also refuse to return the money advanced by the woman. The wretch
well knows that the woman is weak and helpless, and that she is ignorant of the mode of protecting
herself. More than this, she has not the money to go to law.

These are simple facts, and not "sensational items." The records of the "Working Women's Protective
Union" will corroborate them, and will furnish many others.

"Among the employes of a certain Israelitish manufacturer of straw goods in New York was a
poor French woman, who, with her three small children, occupied apartments in a rear tenement
house in Mulberry street. What renders this case of more than ordinary interest, is the fact
that the lady had once been in affluent circumstances, and at one period of her life moved
in the wealthiest circles of Paris. Misfortune befel her in the death of her husband, who was
accidentally killed upon a railroad train. The bulk of the property of her deceased husband was
seized upon by her creditors. The widow, however, succeeded in saving from the general wreck
a few hundred dollars, and with this she emigrated to America, arriving here in the spring,
and bringing with her three little children. Here she anticipated
she would be enabled, with the aid of her superior education, to provide
for herself and family. 'You are right, sir,' he sed, 'I see you understand them,--I wish there were a
few more like you.' An then he sed in a whisper, 'at that wor th' only box he had o' that sooart,
in fact ther'd niver nobbut been that an' another, a'n t'other wor sent as a present to th'
Duke o' Wellington, but th' Duke, he sed wornt hauf as gooid a judge as aw wor; an' he'd sell
me that box for two paand, an' it wor worth three. Aw wor beginnin to feel a bit sickly wi
that aw wor smokin, an' aw didn't care to tawk mich, an' as he hadn't given me onny change,
aw just nodded mi heead, and he had lapped up th' box in a crack, and handed it me, an three
soverings, an' wished me gooid day an hoped aw'd call agean, and bowed me aght oth shop i'
less time nor it taks to tell it. As sooin as awd getten a few yards away, aw threw mi cigar
into th' street an' detarmined aw'd niver smook agean befoore braikfast. Them cigars didn't
last long, for ov coarse aw allus carried a lot i' mi pocket, an' as that used to spoil' em
a friend o' mine persuaded me to buy a cigar case. He sell'd it me varry cheap, nobbut ten
shillin; an' then another gate me to subscribe a guinea to a cricket club, an' aw wondered
ha it wor 'at aw'd niver made friends wi' some o'th' members befoor, for they wor a nice lot.
At th' end of three days mi cigars wor all done, an' soa wor mi five paand nooat. All aw had
wor a empty cigar box, a pastboard cigar case worth abaat sixpence, a ticket 'at entitled me
to visit all th' cricket matches free,--but as th' season wor just endin it wor o' noa use,--an'
had a sooart ov an inklin 'at ther wor some truth i'mi father's words 'at aw worn't old enuff
to be trusted wi' brass.

Aw went to bed, an' fell asleep withaat once thinkin abaat thieves; an' ther's noa daat 'at
what yo loise i' brass yo oft tinles gain i' knowledge, for aw niver forgate th' fate o mi
furst five paand nooat.

Silly Billy.

He wor a queer sooart of a chap wor Billy--allus makkin a fooil ov hissen or else somedy wor
makkin a fooil o' him. He wor a very quiet chap too tho ivery nah an' then he gave hissen a
bit ov a leetnin' i'th' shap ov a rant, or as he used to call it, a 'gooid brust.' It woint
oft he did that sooart o' thing, but when he did he carried it on for a wick or a fortnit,
an' altho' his father had left a nice little farm for him an' his mother, yet it sooin dwindled
to nowt, for what wi' neglectin his wark, an' spendin a bit o' brass, it wor like a cannel
lit at booath ends, it sooin swealed up. Aw remember one day when he'd been drinkin till his
brass wor done, he coom hooam to ax his mother to give him some moor, an' coss shoo said shoo
wod'nt he declared he'd set th' lathe o' fire; but sho wodn't give him onny, soa he went into
th' lathe, an' in a bit one o'th' neighbors saw him gaping at tother side o'th' street an'
went up to ax him what he wor starin at?

"It'll tinkle tip in a bit," sed Billy an' in a bit it did 'tinkle up,' for he'd set th' haymoo
o' fire, an' in abaght an haar, booath th' lathe an' all 'at wor in it wor burned to th' graand.
"Aw tell'd her aw'd do it," he sed, "an' aw'm nooan to be licked when aw start."

Th' poor owd woman wor sadly troubled, but what could shoo do, for what could ony body expect
throo Silly Billy?

Shoo used to have some queer ways did Nancy; an' one system o' her's wor allus to do iverything
like clock wark. When Billy wor having one ov his bits o' sprees, an' stoped away for two or
three days, shoo allus made him his porrige ivery marnin, an' if he worn't thear to ait 'em
shoo put' em i'th' cupbord, all in a row, an' when he did come, he could'nt get a bite o' owt
else till he'd finished' em all, soa he used to start at th' oldest furst, an' as th' owd woman
kept on makkin moor ivery mornin, it wor noa easy job to ovettak 'em, an' be able to sit daan
to a warm meal. But like monny a one beside, altho' he wor soa mich put abaght, it did'nt cure
him; but when he'd had a doo, an' been two or three days at cold poltices; as he call'd em,
he used to say, "Niver noa moor! If aw once get ovver this, yo'll niver catch me at that bat
agean! It's towt me a lesson 'as this." An' noa daat it had, but he varry sooin forgate it.

Ov coarse, when th' brass wor all done, he had to work a bit, an' aw recollect when he started
business ov his own hook, fowk used to plague him sadly, an' weel they mud, for he gate a donkey
an panniers an' started to sell puttates an' greehs; but it soa happened, 'at one mornin he'd
nobbut as monny puttates as ud fill one pannier, an' as he put' em i' one it made it side heavy,
soa he gate a lot o' big stooans an' put 'em i'th' tother to balance it a bit, an' then he
started off. But he hadn't gooan far when a chap met him an' sed, "what are ta sellin, Billy?"
"Aw'm hawkin puttates," he sed. "Why, what's all thease stooans for, has ta started o' leeadin
balder?" "Noa," he sed, (an' then gave him a sly wink as mich as to say aw'l let thee into
a secret), "but does ta see, aw'd nobbut as mich brass as ud buy one pannier full, soa aw wor
foorced to put stooans it th' tother to mak it balance." "Why, lumphead!" sed th' chap, "couldn't
ta put one hauf into one, an' tother into tother?" Billy scratched his heead for a minit an'
then sed, "e'ea! but aw see a better road nor that--aw'l put hauf o'th' stooans amang th' puttates,
an' hauf o'th' puttates, amang th' stooans, an' then aw'st be sure to have it." "Why but cannot
ta mak 'em balance baght stooans, tup heead?" sed th' chap. "Ov coorse aw con! aw niver thowt
o' that," sed Billy, an' he started an' squared 'em aght. But he niver made mich aght o' hawkin,
for he could niver leearn th' difference between six dozen dozens and hauf a dozen dozens,
an fowk 'at wor sharper used to chait him mony a bit.

One queer thing abaght him wor he delighted i' singing, an' if he heeard a song 'at took his
fancy he could remember it word for word. His mother says 'at he's tramped mony a scoor mile
to hear a song at pleased him, an' if ony body'd sing for him he'd give' em owt he had. One
day, as he wor gooin his raands he met wi a chap 'at wor hummin a bit ov a tune, an' he hearken'd
to him for a bit, an' at last he sed, "Maister, aw should like to know that song, ha mich will
yo taich it me for?" "Oh, it's a patent is that, lad, aw should want a gooid deal if aw towt
thee that." "Why," he said, "aw'l gie thi a bunch o' turnips an' four pund o' puttates if tha'll
sing it me twice ovver." "Nay," he sed, "wheniver aw engage to sing, aw allus charge double,
if aw'm honcoord; but I'll sing it' once if tha'll throw a rooap o' onions into th' bargain."
"Well, tha'rt rather up i' thi price," he sed, "but aw'l agree soa start off." Tha mun sing
it ageean for me, wi' ta?" "Nay lad, aw'm nooan soa fond o' singin as that comes to." "By gow,
but tha mun!" "Well if aw do aw'st want all th' puttates tha has left an' th' donkey an' all."
"Nay, Maister, that's rayther too hard, yo willn't want all th' lot aw'l niver believe, yo'l
throw me summat off?" "Well, aw dooant want to be hard o' ony body, but tha knows it's net
to be expected aw shall taich thee a song like that for nowt, but as tha seems to be a daycent
sooart ov a chap, if tha'll gie me th' donkey an' th' puttates aw'l mak thee a present o'th'
panniers." "An' is that th' lowest hawpenny tha'll tak? Aw wodn't bate a hair off th' donkey's
tail at that price; tha knows if tha wants to hear some reglar classified music tha'll ha to
pay." "Well, blaze into it," sed Billy, "an' aw'l hug th' panniers mysel." "They're net a gurt
weight." sed th' chap, "an' aw dar say they'll luk as weel o' thee as o' it." An' wol Billy
wor takkin 'em off th' donkey an' puttin 'em on to hissen, th' chap sang th' song ovver ageean,
an' when he'd done he walked off wi' th' donkey an' as mony puttates as he could hug, an' Billy
started off hooam wi his panniers ov his rig, singin, "Aw live, an' aw'm jolly," wi such gusto
wol th' fowk coom aght to see whativer ther wor to do, an' when they saw him huggin th' panniers
they guessed what wor up, an' shook ther heeads, sarin, "Silly Billy!" Ov coorse when he gate
hooam he tell'd his mother abaght it, an' wad have her listen to this new song. "Song, be hanged!"
shoo sed, "aw'd a deal rather hear that donkey rant nor all th' songs at iha con cram into
thi empty heead." An' away shoo went to get some fowk to follow th' chap an' get th' donkey
back agean.

Two or three sooin set off an' within a few yards o' where Billy sed he'd been, they fan it
quietly nibblin a bit o' grass bith' side o' th' gutter, for it seems th' chap had nobbut been
havin a bit ov a joak, an' left it behund. They gate it hooam agean an'after Billy's mother
had given him a gooid tawkin to, th' thing dropt.

But aw think aw'st niver forget a marlock some chaps played him one day: ther wor abaat six
on 'em, an' they made it up to freeten him a bit, an' mak him believe he wor baan to dee; soa
just as he coom off th' corner o' one o' th' streets, a chap steps up to him.--"Gooid mornin,
Billy! ha does ta feel this mornin, lad?" "Oh! Furst rate!" "Why aw'm fain to hear it," he
sed, "but, by th' heart! lad! tha luk's ill'!" "Does ta think aw do?" "Eea, aw'm sure tha does!"
"Why aw dooant feel to ail owt 'at aw know on,' but aw dooant think 'at this hawkin agrees
wi me so weel." "Happen net, Billy! it doesn't agree wi ivery body, but tha mun tak care o'
thisen, nah do!" When he'd getten a bit farther another chap met him:--"Well Billy!" he sed,
"ha's trade lukkin this mornin lad?" "Things is lukkin rayther black this mornin." "Tha luks
white enuff onyway, has ta been havin another wick o' 'cold porrige aitin?" "Nay aw hav'nt!
but aw dooant feel quite as weel as aw do sometimes, for aw fancy this job doesn't agree wi
me." "Aw dooant think it does bi' th' luk on thi, if tha gooas on tha'll be able ta tak a lodger
i' that suit o' clooas, tha'll ha room enuff,--but tak care o' thisen, lad." Poor Billy wor
beginnin to feel poorly already, but when another met him an' axed him if it wor h' furst time
he'd been aght latly, it knock'd th' breeath reig aght on him. He tried to shaat "puttates!"
but he nobbut gate hauf way throo, for when he'd sed "put!" he had'nt breeath left to say "tates."
"This'll niver do," he said, "aw mun goa hooam an' to bed, its noa gooid trailin abaat th'
streets this fashion, a'a, ha badly aw do feel! an' all's come on soa sudden! A'a, man! man!
what are ta?--as sooin as th' organ strings get aght o' tune, tha'rt noa moor fit for nor a
barrel baght bottom, nor as mich! for they could turn a barrel tother end up; but man! a'a
dear a me!" "Gee up, Neddy, aw'm feeard tha'll sooin have to luk aght for a new maister."

When Billy gate hooam wi' his donkey, his mother wor fair capt. "What's up, Billy," shoo sed,
"Has ta sell'd up?" "Nay, mother, aw've nooan sell'd up, but aw'm ommost done up: get that
bed ready an' let me lig me daan a bit." "Why what's th' matter? Has ta hurt thi or summat?"
"Noa, but aw'm varry poorly." "Where does ta feel to ail owt, lad!" "Aw dooant know, aw think
it's all ovver me, dooant yo think aw luk ill, mother?" "Luk ill! why tha knows lad, aw dooant
think it's allus safe to judge fowk bi ther luks, but aw mun say aw nivver saw thi lookin better
i' mi life." "Why but aw must be poorly, mother, for two or three fowk has tell'd me soa this
marnin." Just then three or four heeads pop'd off th' side o' th' jawm an' set up a gurt laff.
Billy luk'd an' saw it wor th' same chaps 'at had been tell in him ha ill he luk'd. "A'a Billy!"
sed his mother, "aw wonder when tha'll leearn a bit o' wit, tha sees they've nobbut been makkin
gam on thee." "Aw see," he sed, "but they've nooan chaited me soa varry far after all, for
aw'm blow'd if aw iver did believe it! Gee up, Neddy!" an' away he went to his wark.

But like monny a chap 'at's considered rayther soft, he worn't all soft, an' one bit ov a trick
he did is worth tellin. He'd been aght one day tryin to sell some red yearin, but it seemed
as if noabdy wanted owt o' that sooart that day, an' as he wor commin back, a lot o' chaps
wor stood at th' corner o' th' fold, an' one on 'em stop'd him an says, "Ha is it tha'rt bringin
thi yearin back agean?" "Coss ther's noabdy 'll buy' em," sed Billy. "Well what does ta want
for em?" "Aw'l tak owt aw can get, if aw can find a customer, but aw'st net find one here aw
know." "Come dooant tawk so fast, Billy!" sed th' chap, winkin at his mates, "ha mich are they
worth?" "They should be worth ninepence." "Well aw'l bet thee hauf a crown 'at aw can find
thee a customer, if tha'll take what he offers thee for em." "Well aw dooant oft bet," sed
Billy, "but aw'l bet thee haulf a craan if tha offers me a price aw'l tak it." "Done," sed
th' chap, an' th' stakes wor put into a friend's hand to hold. "Nah then!" he sed, "aw'! gie
thee a penny for th' lot." "They're thine," sed Billy, an' he handed 'em ovver. "That's nooan
a bad trade," he sed, "a penny an' hauf-a-craan for ninepennorth o' yearin." Th' chap sa'w
'at he wor done, an' he luk'd rayther dropt on, an' ov coarse his mates wor suited. "Niver
heed," sed Billy "aw dooant like to be hard o' anybody, soa if tha doesn't want 'em aw'l buy'
em back at th' same price." "By gow, Billy! tha'rt a trump," sed th' chap, "tak th' yearins
an' gie me hold o'th' brass." Billy took th' yearings, an' handed him a penny. "Nay! gieme
th' hauf-craan an' all," sed th' chap. "Nooan soa, sed Billy, aw've gien thee th' same price
for' em as tha gave me, an' aw know aw'm net as sharp as some, but as aw've ninepenorth o'
yearin left, an a hauf-a-craan moor i' mi pocket, aw fancy aw've made a profit. An' th' next
time tha wants to mak a fooil ov a chap, start o' somdy 'at's less wit nor this en, an' then
tha weant be dropt on."

That wornt a bad move ov a chap they call Silly Billy.

Put up wi' it.

Aw think aw could tell what day it wor th o' aw didn't know if aw could see a lot o' factry
fowk gooin to ther wark. Mondy's easy to tell, becoss th' lasses have all clean approns on,
an' ther hair hasn't lost its Sundy twists, an' twines ther faces luk ruddier an' ther een
breeter. Tuesdy, ther's a change; they're not quite as prim lukkin! ther topping luk fruzzier,
an' ther's net as monny shignons as ther wor th' day before. Wednesday,--they just luk like
hard-workin fowk 'at live to wark an' wark to live. Ther's varry few faces have a smile on
'em, an' th' varry way they set daan ther clogs seems to say, "Wark-a-day, Live-a-day, Laik-a-day,
Get-noa-pay; Rain-or-noa, Bun-to-goa." Thursdy.--They luk cross, an' ther heeads are abaat
hauf-a-yard i' advance o' ther tooas. Ther clogs seem to ha made up ther mind net to goa unless
they're made. Friday.--That's pay day. Noa matter ha full ther belly may be, ther's a hungry
luk abaat ther een; an'ther's a lot on 'em huggin baskets; an' yo can see it written i' ther
faces 'at if they dar leeave as sooin as they've getten ther bit o' brass they wod. Then comes
Setterday --Short day--an' yo can tell th' difference as sooin as yo clap een on' em. They're
all i' gooid spirits. They luk at th' church clock as they pass, an' think it'll sooin be nooin,
an' then!--An' then what? Why, then they'll have a day an' a hauf for thersen--abaat one fifth
o' ther life--one fifth o' ther health an' strength for thersen. That doesn't luk mich, but
ther fain on it. They owt to be thankful becoss they live in a free country. They can suit
thersen's whether they do that, or go to th' workhaase. Justice, they say, is blind, an' if
Freedom isn't, shoo must be put to th' blush sometimes.

   Who'd be a slave, when Freedom smiling stands,
   To strike the gyves from of his fettered hands?
   Who'd be a slave, and cringe, and bow the knee,
   And kiss the hand that steals his liberty?
   Behold the bird that flits from bough to bough;
   What though at times the wintry blasts may blow,--
   Happier it feels, half frozen in its nest,
   Than caged, though fed and fondled and caressed.
   'Tis said, 'on Briton's shore no slave shall dwell,'
   But have you heard not the harsh clanging bell,
   Or the discordant whistles' yelling voice,
   That says, 'Work slave, or starve! Such boys are apt to do
   well in the world. Many, however, after being
   released from the stores, imitate
   the ways of the clerks and salesmen. They affect
   a fastness which is painful to see in boys so
   young. They sport an abundance of flashy jewelry,
   patronize the cheap places of amusement, and
   are seen in the low concert saloons,
   and other vile dens of the
   city. It is not difficult to predict the
   future of these boys.
   
   The principal retail dry goods stores of New
   York are those of A. T. Stewart & Co., Lord
   & Taylor, Arnold, Constable & Co., and James
   McCreery & Co.
   
   The house of A. T. Stewart & Co. is the best
   known to persons visiting the city. Indeed there
   are very few Americans who have not heard
   of and longed to visit "Stewart's."

It is, besides, the largest and most complete establishment of its kind in the world. The principal
front is on Broadway, and the public entrances are on that street and on the Fourth avenue.
The Ninth street entrances are reserved exclusively for the employes of the house. Many persons
speak of the edifice as a "marble palace," but this is incorrect. It is constructed of iron,
in the style of arcade upon arcade, and its fronts are so thickly studded with windows that
they may be said to consist almost entirely of glass. It is five stories in height above the
street, and above the fifth story there is an interior attic not
visible from the sidewalk.

Below the street there is a basement and a sub-cellar, so that the
monster building is really eight stories in height.

There is no attempt at outward display, the fine effect of the edifice being due to its vast
size and its symmetry. The interior is as simple. The floors are uncarpeted, the shelves are
plain, as are the counters and the customers' seats. The centre of the building is occupied by
a large rotunda extending from the ground floor to the roof. All the upper floors are open around
this rotunda. Two flights of massive stairs lead to the upper floors, and there are three handsome
elevators for the use of customers who do not care to make the journey on foot. Three other
elevators on the Ninth street side are used for carrying goods. Each of the floors covers an
area of about two acres, so that the whole establishment, including the cellar, occupies sixteen
acres of space.

The cellar contains coal bins with a capacity of 500 tons. Close by are eight Harrison boilers
of fifty horse power each, used for operating the steam engines and warming the building with
steam. There are in all ten steam engines located in this immense cellar. These are used for
running the elevators, for working seven steam pumps, for feeding the boilers, and for forcing
water up to the top floor, which is used as a laundry. In a certain part of the cellar is located
the electrical battery, by means of which the gas jets in the building are lighted. Here are
also rooms for the storage of goods.

The basement is occupied by the Carpet-making and Parcel departments. It is the largest room
in the world, and is unbroken save by the light pillars which support the floors above. The Carpet-making
department is interesting. The house deals largely in carpets, and one is surprised at the smallness
of the force employed down here. The carpets purchased are cut, and the pieces matched as they
lie on the floor by women. Then they are placed on a wide table, forty feet long, and are sewn
together by a machine worked by steam. This machine moves along the edge of the table, and the
man operating it rides on it. His only care is to hold the parts to be sewn perfectly even, and
the machine sews a seam of forty feet in from three to five minutes.

In the centre of the basement floor is a space about thirty feet square, enclosed by counters.
This is the Parcel department. All purchases to be sent to the buyer pass through this department,
and these make up about ninety per cent. of the day's business. The purchases are sent here by the
salesmen with a ticket affixed to each, stating the quantity and quality of the article bought,
the amount paid, and the address of the buyer. The goods are then remeasured, and if an error
has been made either in favor of or against the house, it is rectified. The goods are then made
up in secure parcels, each of which is plainly marked with the address of the purchaser. These
parcels are then turned over to the drivers of the wagons used by the house for delivering purchases.
The drivers are furnished with bills for the amounts to be collected on the parcels, and they are
held to a rigid accountability for the delivery of every parcel entrusted to them, and the collection
of all moneys due on them.

The ground floor is the principal salesroom. It is a simple, but elegant apartment, and its chief
ornaments are the goods for sale, which are displayed in the most attractive and tasteful manner.
The room is 300 by 200 feet in size.

It contains 100 counters, with an aggregate length of 5000 feet.

Behind these counters are low shelves on which the goods are kept.

In the centre is the immense rotunda, and at various points are the little wooden pens enclosed
with lattice work used by the cashiers. Each article for sale has its separate department, and
there are thirty ushers on duty to direct purchasers where to find the articles they seek. The
display of goods is magnificent, and includes everything used for the clothing of ladies and children,
either in the piece or ready made. There is also a department in which ladies and children may
have all their clothing of every description made to order.

The second floor is used for the sale of ready-made clothing, suits, upholstery, etc., and
the third floor is the carpet salesroom. The other floors are closed to visitors, and are used
as workshops, laundries, etc.

The convenience of having all these things, and in such great variety, under one roof is very
great, and saves purchasers many a weary walk through the city. The immense capital employed
by Mr. Stewart, and his great facilities of all kinds, enable him to control the markets in which
he makes his purchases and to buy on terms which render it easy for him to undersell all his
competitors. The smaller houses complain bitterly of this, and declare that he is ruining them.
In spite of its immense trade, "Stewart's" is not the most popular place in the city with resident
purchasers. The salesmen have the reputation of being rude and often insolent. There can be no doubt
that, were specific complaints made, Mr. Stewart would administer the necessary punishment to
the offender without delay; but as the offences complained of are chiefly a lack of civility, few
care to complain.

The throng of visitors and purchasers is immense. They have been known to reach the enormous number
of 50,000 in a single day; but the average is 15,000. Looking down from one of the upper floors,
through the rotunda, one can witness as busy and interesting a scene as New York affords. All
kinds of people come here, from the poor woman whose scanty garb
tells too plainly the story of her poverty, to the wife of the millionaire
whose purchases amount to a small fortune, and all classes can be
suited.

The sales of the house average about $60,000 per day, and have been known to reach $87,000. The
bulk of the purchases is made between noon and five o'clock. The average daily sales of the principal
articles are as follows: Silks $15,000; dress goods, $6000; muslins, $3000; laces, $2000; shawls,
$2500; suits, $1000; calicoes, $1500; velvets, $2000; gloves, $1000; furs, $1000; hosiery,
$600; boys' clothing, $700; Yankee notions, $600; embroideries, $1000; carpets, $5500.

[Picture: A. T. STEWART'S RETAIL STORE.]

As may be supposed, the business of this great house requires an army of employes. The force consists
of 1 general superintendent, 19 superintendents of departments, 9 cashiers, 25 book-keepers,
30 ushers, 55 porters, 200 cash boys, 900 seamstresses, working-women, laundresses, etc., 320
salesmen and saleswomen, and 150 salesmen and others in the carpet department, making a total
of 1709 persons. There are other persons employed about the establishment in various capacities,
and these, with the extra help often employed, make the aggregate frequently as much as 2200
persons. The business of the house opens at seven A.M., and closes at seven P.M. All the employes
have thirty minutes allowed them for dinner. One half of all are alternately dismissed at six
o'clock each evening. All the employes, when leaving, must pass through a private door on Ninth
street. On each side of this door is a detective of great experience, whose business it is
to see that none of the employes carry away with them any of the property of the house. The discipline
of the establishment is very rigid, and is enforced by a system of fines and other penalties.

The
general management of the house is entrusted to Mr. Tellur, the General
Superintendent, but Mr. Stewart gives it his personal supervision
as well.

He comes to the store every morning at ten o'clock precisely, and consults with Mr. Tellur about
the business of the previous day, and the wants of that just opening. He goes through the entire
establishment, and personally acquaints himself with the exact condition of the business. He
knows everything connected with the retail store, and every detail of its management receives his
constant supervision, and is conducted in accordance with his instructions. He remains here about
an hour and a half in the morning, and returns at five o'clock in the afternoon, and spends
half an hour more. The rest of his working day is passed at his lower store.

[Picture: LORD AND TAYLOR'S DRY GOODS STORE.]

Lord & Taylor rank next to Stewart, and are a more popular firm with residents than the latter.
They occupy a magnificent iron building at the corner of Broadway and Twentieth street. It
is one of the finest and most picturesque edifices in the city, and is filled with a stock of
goods equal in costliness and superior in taste to anything that
can be bought at Stewart's. On "opening days," or days when the merchants
set out their finest goods for the inspection of the public, Lord
& Taylor generally carry off the palm, for the handsomest and most
tasteful display.

The show windows of this house are among the sights of Broadway.

Two blocks below, on the same side of Broadway, is a row of magnificent white marble stores.
The upper end, comprising about one-third of the entire block, is occupied by Messrs. Arnold,
Constable & Co., a popular and wealthy house. They are noted for the taste and general excellence
of their goods.

James McCreery & Co., at the corner of Broadway and Eleventh street, occupy a part of the ground
floor of the magnificent edifice of the Methodist Book Concern. They do not make as extensive
a display as their competitors, but are well known in the city for their rich and elegant
goods.

The ball and wedding dresses imported and made by this house are among the richest ever seen
in New York.

XXIV. BLEECKER STREET.

Perhaps very few people out of the great city know Bleecker Street at all; perhaps they have
passed it a dozen times or more without noticing it, or if they have marked it at all have regarded
it only as a passably good-looking street going to decay.

But he who does not know Bleecker street does not know New York. It is of all the localities
of the metropolis one of the best worth studying.

It was once the abode of wealth and fashion, as its fine old time mansions testify. Then Broadway
north of it was the very centre of the aristocracy of the island, and Bond street was a primitive
Fifth avenue. Going west from the Bowery, nearly to Sixth avenue, you will find rows of stately
mansions on either hand, which speak eloquently of greatness gone, and as eloquently of hard
times present. They have a strange aspect too, and one may read their
story at a glance.

Twenty-five years ago they were homes of wealth and refinement. The most sumptuous hospitality
was dispensed here, and the stately drawing rooms often welcomed
brilliant assemblages.

Now a profusion of signs announce that hospitality is to be had at a stated price, and the
old mansions are put to the viler uses of third-rate boarding houses and restaurants.

In many respects Bleecker street is more characteristic of Paris than
of New York.

It reminds one strongly of the Latin Quarter, and one instinctively turns to look for the Closerie
des Lilas. It is the headquarters of Bohemianism, and Mrs. Grundy
now shivers with holy horror when she thinks it was once her home.

The street has not entirely lost its reputation. No one is prepared to say it is a vile neighborhood;
no one would care to class it with Houston, Mercer, Greene, or Water streets; but people shake
their heads, look mysterious, and sigh ominously when you ask them about it. It is a suspicious
neighborhood, to say the least, and he who frequents it must be prepared
for the gossip and surmises of his friends.

No one but its denizens, whose discretion can be absolutely trusted,
knows anything with certainty about its doings or mode of life, but
every one has his own opinion.

Walk down it at almost any hour of the day or night, and you will
see many things that are new to you.

Strange characters meet you at every step; even the shops have a Bohemian aspect, for trade
is nowhere so much the victim of chance as here.

You see no breach of the public peace, no indecorous act offends you; but the people you meet
have a certain air of independence, of scorn, of conventionality, a certain carelessness which mark
them as very different from the throng you have just left on Broadway.

They puzzle you, and set you to conjecturing who they are and what they are, and you find yourself
weaving a romance about nearly every man or woman you meet.

That long-haired, queerly dressed young man, with a parcel under
his arm, who passed you just then, is an artist, and his home is in
the attic of that tall house from which you saw him pass out. It is
a cheerless place, indeed, and hardly the home for a devotee of the
Muse; but the artist is a philosopher, and he flatters himself that
if the world has not given him a share of its good things, it has
at least freed him from its restraints, and so long as he has the
necessaries of life and a lot of jolly good fellows to smoke and drink
and chat with him in that lofty dwelling place of his, he is content
to take life as he finds it.

If you look up to the second floor,
you may see a pretty, but not over fresh looking young woman, gazing
down into the street. She meets your glance with composure, and with
an expression which is a half invitation to "come up." She is used
to looking at men, and to having them look at her, and she is not
averse to their admiration. Her dress is a little flashy, and the
traces of rouge are rather too strong on her face, but it is not a
bad face. You may see her to-night at the --- Theatre, where she is
the favorite. Not much of an actress, really, but very clever at winning
over the dramatic critics of the great dailies who are but men, and
not proof against feminine arts. Tha's browt moor
milk nor ud feed all th' childer i' Silsden for a month."

"Doant yo' be feeared abaat th' milk," sed Burt, "awl pay for it; let it have summat to ait.
Tun summat into it. Aw wonder if it ud like a drop o' hooam-brewed?" "If tha doesn't mak thisen
scarce aw'll break ivvery booan i' thi skin. Haven't aw getten enuff to do wi' this brat, withaat
been bothered wi' thee! Go and fetch that cunstable when aw tell thi."

"Well, if aw mun goa, aw'll goa, but mind what yo're doing with that thing, an' dooant squeeze
it." After lukkin' at it once moor, an' seeing it sneeze, he started off to th' village happier
nor any man within a hundred mile.

It didn't tak Burt long to find th' cunstable, for he knew th' haase where he slept most ov
his time, and they wor sooin up at owd Mary's. They'd a fine time when they gat there too,
for th' child wer asleep, and Mary refused to let onybody disturb it. Burt declared it wor
his, an he'd a reight to see it when he liked; an'th' cunstable sed he wor armed wi law an'
should tak it into custody whether it wor asleep or net. Mary's husband wor upstairs confined
to bed wi rhumatics, but th' dowters had tell'd him all abaat Burt's adventure, an' as he could
hear all 'at wor sed, he furst began to feel uneasy, an' then to loise his temper, soa he seized
his crutch an' ran daan stairs like a lad o' sixteen, an' laid abaat him reight an' left, an'
i' less nor a minit Burt, th' cunstable, an' owd Mary wor aghtside.

"Nah," he sed, as he stood i' th' doorhoil, puffin' an' blowin', wi' his crutch ovver his shoulder,
like a musket, "Aw'll let yo see whose child that is! It wor fun i' my field, an' it belangs
to me. What my land produces belangs to me, noa matter whether it's childer or chicken weed!"
Things wor i' this state when one o' th' dowters showed her heead aght o' th' winder an' cried,
"Mother, it's wakkened, an' it's suckin' it's thumb as if it wor clammed to deeath." "Mary,"
sed th' owd man, "does ta mean to starve that child to deeath? coss if tha cannot luk after
it, aw'll luk after it mysel'." This wor th' signal for all to goa inside, an' a bonnier pictur'
yo nivver saw nor that war when owd Mary sat wi' that little thing on her lap, givin' it sops,
an' three big, strong, but kind-hearted fellows, sat raand, watchin' ivvery bit it tuk as if
ther own livin' depended on it. Ther war a gooid deeal o' 'fendin' an' provin', but whear that
child coom fra an' who wor it's mother noabody could tell. Time passed, an' as Mary sed th'
child thrived like wood, an' ivverybody called it "Burt's Babby." Burt wor a decent, hard-workin'
lad, an' had for a long time luk'd longin'ly at one o' Mary's dowters, an' one day ther wor
a stir i' th' village, an' Burt war seen donned up like a dummy at a cloas shop, an' wi' a
young woman linked to his arm as if shoo thowt he wor goin' to flyaway, an' it wanted all her
weight to keep him daan, an' claise behind, wor th' owd farmer an' his wife, owd Mary Muggin,
an' th' little babby.

It didn't tak th' parson monny minits to tee' em together for better an' for worse, an' then
Burt took th' babby an' gave it to his bride, sayin', "Here's summat towards haase keepin'
anyway." An' shoo tuk it an' kussed it as if it had been ther own. They went to live at a nice
little farm, an' th' owd fowk gave' em a gooid start. Sally Bray had allus shown a fondness
for Burt's babby, 'at fowk could hardly accaant for, an' shoo went an' offered her sarvices
as sarvant an' nurse, an' nivver did ony body seem soa fond of a child as Sally did o' that.

Things went on nicely for a while, an' then th' scarlet fever coom; every day saw long sorrowful
processions follerin' little coffins, an' ivery body luk'd sad an' spake low.

At last, Burt's babby wor takken sick, an' all they could do couldn't save it, an' early one
mornin' it shut it's een, an' went its way to join those 'at had gone before.

Burt an' his wife wor varry mich troubled, but it war Sally Bray 'at suffered mooast. They
couldn't get her to leave that cold still form, soa they left her with it till her grief should
be softened; an' when some time had passed, they went to call her, but it wor no use, for her
spirit had goan to tend Burt's babby.

After shoo wor buried, some papers were picked aght o' one o' Sally's boxes, and it were sed'
at they explained all, but what they were Burt an' his wife nivver telled, so it still remains
a mystery.

At th' grave side stood a fine young chap, who dropt monny a tear as th' coffin wor lowered.
He wor sed to be verry like that strange sailor 'at had once before visited th' village. When
Burt passed him he gave him a purse, sayin' "for a gravestone," and went away noabody knew
whear. Some sed it was Sally's brother, but noabody seems to know.

Anybody 'at likes to tak a walk an' call at that little graveyard can see a plain stoan 'at says

   SALLY BRAY,
      AN'
   BURT'S BABBY.

Mak th' best on't.

They say it taks nine tailors to mak a man. Weel, all aw have to say abaat it is, 'at aw've
known some men i' mi time, 'at it ud tak nineteen to mak a tailor. Why some simpletons seem
to think 'at they've a right to mak fun ova chap becoss he's a tailor, aw can't see. They're
generally praad enuff o' ther clooas--then why not be praad o' th' fowk 'at mak 'em. Ther's
a deal o' fowk 'at wodn't be as weel off as they are if it worn't for th' tailors. But it's
noa use tawkin, for ther's some 'at couldn't live if they didn't find summat to say a word agean.

   A little word 'at's easy sed,
      Sometimes may heal a smart;
   A cruel word or luk instead,
      May help to braik a heart.

   Men hang together like a chain,
     Tho' varied be ther plan;
   Each link hangs by another link,
     Man hangs to brother man.

But a gooid word throo some is as scarce as a white crow. They're iverlastingly lukking aght
for faults an' failins, an' gooid words an' gooid deeds are things they niver think are due
to onnybody but thersen.

   Life's pathway could oft be made pleasant,
      If fowk wor to foller this plan;
   Throo a prince ov the throne to a peasant,
      To do a gooid turn when they can.

But they'll nawther do a gooid turn thersen nor let onybody else do one if they can help it.
They seem to be born wi' soa mich eliker i' ther blooid 'at if they come i' contact wi' ony
sweet milk o' human kindness, 'at it curdles it. Whether it's ther own fault or th' fault o'
ther mother aitin too many saar gooisberries before they wor born aw can't tell. Aw've met
some soa ill contrived 'at they wodn't let th' sun shine on onybody's puttaty patch but ther
own if they could help it.

Nah this class o' fowk have generally one or two noations o' ther own 'at they think iverybody
else owt to be ruled by. One'll be a strict teetotaller, an' consider 'at onybody 'at taks
a drop o' drink is gooin to a place whear top coits wiln't be needed. Another belangs to some
sect, an' doesn't hesitate to say 'at onybody 'at gooas to a Concert Hall has signed a contract
wi' that dark complexioned owd snoozer 'at wears horns an' wags a tail. They've been at th'
trouble to chalk aght a line for iverybody else to walk on, tho' they know varry weel 'at they
dooant allus keep to it thersen when ther's nubdy lukkin.

Well, let them 'at relish th' saars have' em to ther hearts' content, but dooant try to prevent
other fowk havin some o' th' sweets. Aw'm one o' them 'at likes th' sweets best, an' if they'll
nobbut let me alooan aw'll promise niver to mell o' them.

Grooanin, mooanin, an' grummelin, is abaat th' warst way o' spendin one's time. If yo come
in for a lot o' gooid things, enjoy 'em wol yo've th' chance, an' dooant pass by ivery flaar
'at smiles along yor path for fear yo may find a twitch-clock i' one. An' if things dooant
turn aght just as gooid as yo'd like' em, try to mak th' best o' th' bit o' gooid ther is in 'em.

   They tell me this world's full o' trouble,
      An' each one comes in for a share;
   An' pleasure they say is a bubble,
      'At gooas floating away up in th' air.
   But aw'll niver give way to repinin,
      Tho' th' claads may luk gloomy an' black,
   For they all have a silvery linin,
      An' some day shall breeten awr track.
         Let other fowk brood o'er ther sorrow,
         From each day enjoyment we'll borrow,
         Let to-morrow tak care ov to-morrow,
         An strive to be happy to-day.

Mrs Spaiktruth's Pairty.

It ud be a gooid thing if somdy could find a remedy for backbitin an' gossipin:--for lyin an'
stailin an' a lot moor things o'th' same sooart 'at's varry common. Last year aw gate an invitation
to a woman's tea drinkin, an' ov coarse aw went, for aw niver miss a chonce o' enjoyin mysen
if aw can do it withaat mich expense. Th' warst o' this do wor' at ther wor noa man amang,
em but me, an' aw shouldn't a been thear, but Mistress Spaiktruth wanted me to repoart th'
speeches, an' as shoo wor givin th' pairty shoo set at th' end o'th' table an' teem'd aght
th' teah an' Mistress Snipenooas put th' rum in. After iverybody had getten supplied ther wor
quietness for abaat five minutes, an' altho' nobdy wanted owt to ait, fatty cakes an' buttered
muffins went aght o'th' seet like winkin. After th' second cup one or two began whisperin a
bit, an' after th' third, it wor like being i' th' middle ov a lot o' geese; they wor all cacklin
at once, an' judging bi th' smiles o' ther faces they felt very happy. When th' pots wor sided
(an' they'd takken gooid care to leave nowt but th' pots to side), they drew up in a ring raand
th' fire, an' Mrs. Spaiktruth wor put i'th' rockin chair to rule th' proceedins.

'Nah, lasses,' shoo sed, 'aw havnt mich to say nobbut to tell yo all at yor varry welcome,
an' aw hooap yo've all made a gooid drinkin ('we have lass!') 'an aw hooap we shall have some
gooid speeches throo some on yo', for aw know thers some gooid tawkers amang yo, but this year's
meetin is to be conducted on a different plan to onny we've had befoor. Ther hasn't to be ony
gossipin or backbitin, an' them 'at cannot say a few words withaat scandalizin ther neighbours,
blagardin ther own husbands, or throwin aght hints likely to injure sombdy's else, munnot spaik
at all.'

When Mrs. Spaiktruth had finished, th' wimmen luk'd one at another, fast what to mak on it.
Two or three o'th' older end settled thersen daan for a sleep, an' th' rest luk'd as faal as
a mule i' th' sulks. Aw pooled aght mi book to tak daan th' speeches, an' this is my repooart.--

   1st Speech.--'Let's goa lasses.'
   2nd Speech.--'Ther's nowt to stop here for.'
   3rd Speech.--'Aw'll goa too, awm feard o' goin bi mysen i' th'
      dark.'
   4th Speech.--'Awr childer'll be waitin for me.'
   5th Speech.--'It's my weshin day to morn, soa aw want to get to
      bed i' daycent time.'
   6th Speech.--(Five or six at once) 'Come on.'

Th' meetin braik up varry early, an' as sooin as they'd getten aght side, aw heeard 'em sayin
'at Mistress Spaiktruth wor naa better nor shoo should be, an' if shoo thowt shoo could put
on airs wi' them shoo wor varry mich mistakken, an' as for gossipin, shoo wor th' longest tongued
woman i' th' neighbourhood, an' they declared they'd niver enter a haase shoo kept agean. Aw
saw Mrs. Spaiktruth next day, an' aw sed, 'ther worn't mich tawkin at yor teah drinkin last
neet,' shoo smiled, but all shoo sed wor 'Silence is better nor slander.'

Why Tommy isn't a Deacon.

Tommy wor allus considered to be th' tip top in his trade. His worn't a common sooart ov a
callin like wayvin, or spinnin, or coil leeadin. He nobbut had to deal wi'th' heeads o'th'
community. Th' fact is he wor a barber; an' ther's monny a chap at awd moor o' thear gooid
fortun to th' way he fixed up th' aghtside o' thear heeads, nor what they did to th' fixin
i'th' inside.

Aw've monny a time thowt when aw've seen him thrang 'at his trade wor just a reight schooil
for a chap to gaa to, to leearn to have contempt for wod-be gurt fowk, for aw've seen chaps
come in lukkin as fierce as a pot-lion, an ommost makkin yo tremel wi' th' way they sed' gooid
mornin,' but as sooin as they've getten set daan, an' a gurt print table-cloth tucked under
ther chin, an' lathered up to ther een, they've sat as quiet an' luk'd as sheepish as a chap'
at's just been to see his sweetheart get wed.

Well, ther wor nobbut one thing 'at Tommy aspired to, moor nor what he had, an' that wor to
be a deacon. Net 'at he knew owt abaat what a deacon owt to be, or owt to do, but becoss a
chap 'at used to goa to th' same schooil when they wor lads, had getten made a deacon at th'
Starvhoil Baptists' Chapel, an' Tommy didn't like to be behund hand; an' then agean ther wor
a woman in th' case.

Tommy had allus been a pretty regular attender at auther one chapel or another, but he'd niver
stuck to one i' particular, for he liked to hear different preachers, an' he didn't feel varry
anxious to pay pew rent. But just abaat this time summat happened 'at made a change in him.

Cloise to whear he lived ther wor a chap 'at kept a sausage shop, an' he wor takken sick an'
deed, an' his widder sent for Tommy to come an' shave him befoor he wor burrid, an' he did
it i' sich a nice an' considerate way, an' tawked soa solemn, an' pooled sich a long face,
'at he gate invited to th' funeral, an wor axed to be one o'th' bearers an' as he nobbut stood
abaat four feet in his booits, he consented at once, for as t'other five chaps all stood abaat
six feet, he knew he wodn't have mich to carry.

When th' funeral wor nicely ovver, an' they gate back to th' haase, they wor all invited to
stop an' have a bit o' summat to ait, an' as sausage wor th' handiest o' owt to cook, shoo
axed 'em if they'd have some. Nubdy'd owt to say agean it, but Tommy didn't seem satisfied,
an' when th' widder saw it shoo sed, 'may be, Tommy sausage doesn't agree wi' yo,--is thear
owt else yo'd like?'

"Well," he sed, "aw've nowt agean sausage, but aw think 'at black pudding wad be moor appropriate
for a burrin."

"Tha'd happen like black beer to swill it daan," sed one. "Nah, yo 'at want sausage can have
it, an' them 'at likes black puddin can have that," shoo sed.' An' varry sooin ther wor a dish
o' booath befoor' em, but nubdy seemed to fancy th' black pudding nobbut Tommy, an aw dooant
think he enjoyed' em mich, for they worn't varry fresh.

'Get some moor, Tommy,' shoo sed, 'it does me gooid to see you ait 'em, for they wor the last
thing awr Jack made i' this world, an' aw like to see some respect paid to him. He little thowt
when he wor makkin them 'at he'd be deead wi' th' small-pox an' burrid in a wick.' Wi' this
shoo began to cry, an' as th' mourners kept leavin one bi one, ther wor sooin nubdy left but
Tommy to sympathise wi' her, an' as ivery time he sed owt shoo shoved him another black puddin
on his plate, he began to think it time he went hooam, for if shoo kept on at that rate it
wodn't tak long to mak another burrin. In a bit he wor forced to stop, an' he sed he thowt
it wor time for him to goa; but shoo put her hand on his heead an' luk'd daan at him soa sorrowful
like, as shoo lifted daan a black bottle aght o'th' cubbord, wol he couldn't find in his heart
to leave her, soa sittin daan they had a drop o' gin an' watter together, for shoo wanted some
to draand her sorrow, an he wanted summat to settle his stummack. Then he began lukkin raand,
an' he wor capt to find what a nice comfortable haase shoo had, an' all th' furniture as gooid
as new; and ivery glass he tuk he fancied shoo wor better lukkin nor he'd seen her befoor,
an' as he didn't offer to leave as long as th' gin lasted, bi th'time it wor done he thowt
he'd niver seen a widder 'at suited him as weel, an' as he wanted a wife he couldn't help thinkin
'at he mud do wor nor try to find room thear to hing his hat up.

He knew at shoo wor varry nicely off an' could affoord to live withaat th' sausage shop, an'
although shoo wor big enuff to mak two sich chaps as him, he didn't think that wor onny objection.

He niver knew exactly ha he gate hooam that neet, but he went to bed an' dreamt 'at he wor
riding in a hearse to get wed to th' widder, an' th' trees on booath sides o'th' road wor hung
wi' garlands o' black pudding.

Two months had passed, an' Tommy hadn't let his sympathy stop wi' th' funeral, but used to
call regularly once a wick to see her, an' allus went to the same chapel ov a Sunday, an' tuk
care to dress all i' black, an' had a black band raand his hat, which coom in varry weel to
cover up th' grease spots; an' one neet as they wor gooin hooam together, he screwed up his
courage an' ax'd her if shoo didn't think, as shoo wor soa lonely, an' he wor lonely too 'at
they'd better join?

'Tha'rt to lat,' shoo sed, 'for aw joined long sin, an' wor made a member directly after aw
burrid awr poor Jack.'

'But that isn't what aw mean,' sed Tommy, 'aw mean, hadn't we better join an' get wed, for
awm sure we could get on varry nicely together.'

'Well, aw think we can get on varry nicely separate,' shoo sed, 'but anyway, if iver aw do
get wed agean it'll have to be a member o'th' chapel; for awr Jack, deead an' gooan as he is,
an' ther wor niver a better chap teed to a woman nor he wor, yet he had his faults, an' he
knew a deeal moor abaat sausages an' puddins nor he knew abaat sarmons an' prayers, an' he'd
rayther ha gooan to a dog feight nor a deacons' meetin ony day, an' as he left me varry nicely
provided for, though aw've nubdy to thank for that but misen, aw can affoord to wait wol aw
get suited.'

'Well, Hannah Maria,' he sed, 'but suppoas aw wor a deacon do yo think aw should suit?'

'That aw connot tell,' shoo sed, 'but if tha iver gets to be a deacon tha can ax me then.'

Soa Tommy bade her gooid neet; an' nah he wor detarmined to be a deacon come what wod.

Next Sunday he joined th' Sunday Schooil as a taicher, tho' he knew noa moor abaat taichin
nor th' powl 'at hung o' th' aghtside ov his shop door. Then he tuk a sittin in a pew reight
anent th' parson, tho' he had to pay well for it, an' when they made a collection, which wor
pratty oft, an' th' chaps used to goa raand wi' th' box allus when they wor singin th' last
hymn, he used to be soa takken up wi' th' singin wol th' chap had to nudge him two or three
times; then he'd throw daan his book an' fidget in his pocket as if he'd forgetten all abaat
it, an' bring aght sixpenoth ov hawpneys, an' put 'em in wi' sich a rattle wol ivery body'd
knew 'at he'd gien summat.

He wor allus th' furst in his seeat an' one o'th' last to leeav, an' ivery Sunday he managed
to have summat to say awther to th' parson or one o'th' deacon's, wol befoor he'd been thear
a month he'd getten to be quite a nooated chap.

Wheniver one o'th' congregation called in to get shaved, they allus faand him readin th' Evangelical
Magazine, or else repooarts o'th' Liberation Society, an' it worn't long befoor sombdy tell'd
him in a saycret 'at he wor baan to be propoased for a deacon. He tried to luk as if he cared
nowt abaat it, but as sooin as the chap went aght, he flang his lather brush under th' table,
threw his razor an' white appron into a corner, upset his lather box on to th' Evangelical,
an' ran up stairs two steps at a time, an' seized a bottle off th' shelf, an' sayin, 'Here's
to th' deacon!' swallowed hauf a pint o' neat, an' what else he might ha done aw dooant know
if he hadn't ommost brokken his neck wi' tryin to turn a summerset.

This browt him to his senses a bit, an' then he sat daan to reckon up ha mich a wick he'd have
comin in when he'd getten wed to th' widder.

Nah aw hardly like to say it, but it's true, Tommy wor rayther fond ov a drop o' summat strong,
but he niver let monny fowk see him tak it after he'd joined th' chapel. But he had just one
confidential friend, an' he allus tell'd him iverything, an' ov coarse he'd let him know all
abaat th' widder, an' being made a deacon; soa he sent for him, an' they'd a fine time on it
that neet, for they shut up th' shop an' gate as full as they could carry, an' just as they
wor gooin to pairt, a letter coom to tell Tommy 'at he'd to be voted for as a deacon after
th' Thursday's meetin; an' as that day wor Tuesday they hadn't long to wait, soa they detarmined
to have another glass or two on th' heead on it, an' they kept it up soa long wol at last they
both fell asleep.

When they wakkened it wor broad dayleet, an' they felt rayther seedy; soa they agreed to separate,
an' Tommy made his friend promise to be sure to call on him to tak him to th' meetin.

Alick promised, an' then left him. Nah Alick wor a man ov his word, soa he decided net to goa
hooam for fear o' forgettin, but he hadn't been sat long i'th' 'Tattered Rag Tap,' befoor he
fell asleep' 'When he wakken'd it wor cloise on six o' clock, an' th' furst thowt 'at struck
him wor 'at that wor th' time for th' meetin;--for he didn't think 'at it worn't wol the day
after; soa swallowin daan another stiff glass o' rum, he set off to fotch Tommy.

When he gate thear he saw Tommy sittin nursin his heead an' lukkin as sanctimonious as if he'd
niver done owt wrang in his life.

'Come on!' he sed, 'if tha doesn't luk sharp tha'll be to lat!'

'What does ta mean, Alick,' he sed, 'th' meetin isn't till to morn at neet.'

'Aw tell thi it's to neet, an' it's time tha wor thear nah. Aw promised tha should be i' time
an' tha'll ha to goa.'

'Aw tell th' meetin isn't wol Thursday!'

'Well, this is Thursday.'

'Tha'rt drunk, Alick; tha doesn't know what tha'rt talking abaat.'

Alick wor just drunk enuff to have his own rooad, an' wodn't listen to reason, soa he says,
'Awl let thi see who it is 'at's druffen! Awl awther ha thee made a deacon or a deead en afoor
tha gooas to bed to neet!' an' sayin soa, he seized hold on him, an' tuckin him under his arm
as if he'd been a umbereller he started off aght o' door. Tommy begged an' prayed, an' kicked
an' fittered, but all to noa use. Alick wor three times as big as him, an' held him like a vice.

Just as they'd getten into th' street they met all th' miln fowk, an' as they wor booath weel
known, fowk laffed rarely, for they thowt it a gooid spree. Th' rooads wor varry mucky an'
sloppy, an' as Alick worn't varry steady on his pins they hadn't gooan far befoor they wor
booath rollin i'th' sludge, but Alick niver left goa; he scramel'd up, an' off agean, an' wor
varry sooin at th' chapel door. Th' only consolation 'at poor Tommy had wor thinkin 'at th'
chapel wodn't be oppen, an' then Alick wod find aght his mistak; but it unfortunately happened'
at ther wor a meetin that neet i'th vestry abaat establishing a Band o' Hope, soa th' chapel
doors wor oppen. Alick rushed in wi' poor Tommy, moor deead nor alive. Th' noise they made
sooin browt all th' fowk aght o'th' vestry, an' th' parson coom fussin to see what wor to do,
an' as ther wor nobbut one or two leets i'th' chapel bottom, an' nooan up stairs, he could
hardly see what it all meant. Just then Alick let goa, an' Tommy flew up stairs like a shot,
hooapin 'at as it wor ommost dark he'd be able to find his way aghtside befoor he wor seen.

Alick luk'd varry solid an' tried to balance hissen by holdin to one o'th' gas fixtures.

'What's the meaning of this?' sed th' parson.

'Please yor reverence, hic,--aw've browt yo th' new deacon, hic,--an' a d---l ov a job aw've
had to mak him come, but awm a man o' mi word, an' aw promised he should bi here i' time, an'
aw'd ha browt him if aw'd had to being him in his coffin. That's th' sooart ov chap aw am old
cock!'

Bi this time all th' fowk wor gethered raand, an' th' parson luk'd throo one to another, to
see if they could explain matters, but they wor all fast amang it.

Alick wor standin lukkin raand in a sackless sooart ov a way, when all at once he spied th'
widder amang 'em, soa ponitin her aght he sed, 'Jack's widder thear can tell yo all abaat it,
it's been made up between them two, an' a varry gooid pair they'll mak, an' if he cannot shave
her, shoo'll be able to lather him. Tha knows awm a man o' mi word, Hannah Maria, an' aw sed
aw'd bring him.'

All th' nooatice th' widder tuk wor to shak her neive in his face, an' as they all could see
ha drunk Alick wor, they left him standin wol they locked all th' doors an' prepared to have
a hunt for th' chap 'at had run up stairs. But Tommy wor detarmined net to be catched if he
could help' it, an' a fine race he led' em, for he flew ovver th' pews like a cat, an' as th'
door-keeper, an' pew oppener, an' th' parson ran after him, th' wimmen kept gettin into ther
rooad, an' ovver they tummeld knockin th' cannels aght as they fell, an' of all th' skrikin
an' screamin yo iver heeard, it licked all.

Alick wor bi hissen daan stairs, an' wor feelin rayther misty amahg it, but when he heard all
th' noise he bethowt him 'at it must be a pairt o'th' ceremony, an' he began to feel excited.

'Keep it up owd lad! Gooid lad Tommy! Thar't a cock burd! By gow I tha niver should ha been
a barber! Two hauf-craans to one on th' little en!'

But they catched him at last; an' as they didn't know who it wor, an' he wor soa covered wi'
muck an dust wol it wor hard to tell, they browt him daan stairs whear ther wor a better leet.

When th' parson saw who it wor he could hardly believe his een, an' all t' others put ther
hands as if they thowt th' roof worn't safe.

'Thomas,' sed th' parson solemnly, 'I'm sorry to see thou hast fallen. Thy race here is run.'

'Well, he ran weel didn't he?' sed Alick. Ther wor moor nor him fell i' that race, or else
ther wor a deeal o' skrikin for nowt. But it just suits me, aw wodn't ha missed it for a shillin!
aw wor niver at th' makkin ov a deacon afoor, it's three times as mich fun as makkin a free mason.'

Tommy tried to spaik, but he wor soa aght o' wind wol he couldn't say a word, an' as sooin
as th' doors wor oppened he made a bolt for hooam. Alick follerd him, but fan th' door locked,
soa he went hooam too.

Next mornin, nawt her on 'em could exactly tell what had happened th' neet afoor, but Alick
went to pay Tommy a visit. What wor sed aw dooant know, but they tell me 'at Alick's shaved
hissen iver sin, for he doesn't seem to like th' idea o' Tommy bein soa varry near him wi' a razor.

Ov course Tommy worn't made a deacon, an' what wor war nor all he lost th' widder into th' bargain.

They did try to get him to join th' Good Templars; an' Alick sed if he wanted to be a member
he'd promise to see' at he wor thear i' time if he had to sit up another neet for it; 'an tha
knows awm a man o' mi word, doesn't ta, Tommy?'

But someha or other Tommy seems content to stop as he is, but if yo should iver give him a
call, aw wodn't advise yo to say owt abaat him bein made deacon, for th' thowts on it seems
to be like th' black pudding he had at th' burrin drinkin,--varry heavy on his stummack, an'
all th' gin an' watter he's been able to get has niver swilled it daan.

Hannah Maria's getten wed agean; shoo wor as gooid as her word.--shoo wed a local praicher;
but as his labours didn't seem to profit him mich, he left th' connexion, an' wi' Hannah Maria's
bit o' brass he bowt th' valiation o'th 'Purrin Pussycat' public haase, an' shoo tends th'
bar wi' as mich red ribbon flyin raand her heead as ud mak reins for a six-horse team. Tommy
called once, but when he saw th' picture frame 'at he'd taen soa mich pains wi' for Jack's
funeral card hung up wi' a ticket in it sayin 'prime pop,' he supt up his rum an' walked sorrowfully
aght, withaat payin for it, an' he's niver been seen thear sin.

One Amang th' Rest.

I cannot say that the birth of Sally Green was heralded with many joyful anticipations. Her
father was one of those unfortunate men who have never had any trade taught to them, and his
income, always small, was also very precarious. One day you might find him distributing circulars,
another, acting as porter; at times he got a stray job as gardener, and was always willing
to undertake almost any thing by which to earn an honest penny. His wife had for many years
been a sickly woman, yet she was fruitful, as was proved by the six children who with laughter
or tears, as the case might be, welcomed their father home.

"Old Tip," as he was familiarly called both at home and abroad, was sitting opposite the fire,
smoking an old clay pipe, when the news was brought that little Sally was born, and both mother
and babe were doing well. He answered simply, "Ho!" "An' is that all tha has to say when tha's
getten another dowter, an' one o' th' grandest childer aw think' at wor iver born?"

"Well, what am aw to say? It's all reight, isn't it? Shoo'll be one amang th' rest."

Although Tip appeared to treat the event with such indifference, yet his mind was ill at ease,
for he well knew that his scanty means had barely sufficed to find food for those dependent
upon him before time, and an additional mouth to provide for was by no means a thing to be desired.

There is an old saying, that God never sends a mouth without sending something to put in it,
and that is very true, but it is just possible that the food sent to put in it is appropriated
to some other mouth, that has already got above its share. If this was not so, we should be
spared the pain of reading the heartrending accounts that are so frequently brought under our
notice of people being "starved to death."

It is not my intention to detail all the little incidents connected with Sally's early years;
suffice it to say that she was dragged up somehow, along with her brothers and sisters, who
as they got older and able to work and earn a wage sufficient to support themselves, left one
by one to depend upon their own exertions, but never once giving a thought to the debt of gratitude
they owed to those, who had laboured so long, and endured so many troubles for their sakes.

In time Sally was old enough to be put to some business, and as she had all along been of a
weaker constitution than her sisters, it was deemed advisable to select some occupation for
her of a lighter description. Accordingly she soon found herself placed with a shopkeeper in
the town, to learn the mysteries of concocting bonnets, caps, &c. The money she received at
the commencement was very little, but doubtless was a just equivalent for her labours; but
her parents, whose income had decreased with their increasing years, had often to suffer privations,
in order to dress Sally as became her position. Sally was naturally quick of apprehension,
and the old folks' hearts were often cheered by the reports of her advancement.

"It maks me thankful monny a time i'th' day, Tip, to think ha Sally taks to her wark; an' tha
sees shoo's soa steady an' niver braiks ony time, an' aw connot help thinkin, 'at may be, shoo'll
net only be a comfort to us in old age, but a varry gurt help."

"Shoo's steady enough," said Tip, "but aw dooant think its wise to build ony castles i'th'
air abaat her helpin us mich. Th' kitten seldom brings th' old cat a maase. Nooan o' th' brothers
has iver done owt for us,--net 'at aw want owt, net aw; but aw know 'at we've had to do a deeal
for them, an' it luks rayther hard, at they should niver think abaat payin a trifle back; an'
awm feeared Sally 'll be one amang th' rest."

"Happen net. Tha wor allus fond o' lukkin o'th' dark side."

"Aw may weel be fond o' lukkin at it, for awve seen varry little o'th' breet en."

Sally continued to progress, and her employer was not slow to recognize her abilities and increase
her wages in proportion. She often indulged in dreams of what she would do for her parents,
as soon as she was able, but as yet her own wants were so very pressing, that it took all her
money to satisfy them. She saw and admired her fellow-workers, as they entered or left the
place of business, dressed in such clothes as she had never had, and such as it must be some
time before she could hope to obtain. But she clung to the hope that the time would come, and
she strained every nerve to hasten its approach. Though by no means vain, yet it was quite
evident, Sally was aware she was as much her companions' superior, in personal attractions,
as they were her superiors in point of dress, and it is to be feared, that there were times
when she consulted her mirror with exultation, and painted in her imagination pictures how
she could outshine them all when the time came.

By degrees almost imperceptible, crept in a dislike to her home;--not to those who owned it,
far from it. To her parents she was still loving and dutiful, but she began to conceive that
her own attempts to improve her appearance, her manner of speaking, and her general carriage,
were strangely at variance with her humble home and its belongings. Happily, those precepts
most potent to restrain any waywardness or wickedness, had been early instilled into her by
her mother, whose quiet christian life had been her daily example. Her religion was pure and
simple, and she never failed to impress upon Sally the happiness to be derived from an adherence
to the truth, and a faith in the goodness of God.

Years rolled on, and the slightly built girl was developed into the beautiful woman. She occupied
the second position in the work-room, and her love of dress she was enabled to gratify to its
full extent. Many a young man lingered about the door of the shop at night, in hopes of catching
a smile or some mark of encouragement, but Sally's heart was free, respectful to all, but showing
partiality to none, she passed on scathless through many temptations that might have proved
too strong for many older than herself.

One night a strange event occurred. As she was hurrying home, and had arrived within a few
yards of the door, she stumbled over some object in her path, and it was with much difficulty
she succeeded in saving herself from an awkward fall. It was too dark to see what the object
was, but she ran into the house, acquainted her parents with the event, and accompanied by
them bearing a light she returned to see what the obstacle was. Across the pavement was laid
a young man, about her own age, in a helpless, perhaps a dying state.

"Poor thing! what's th' matter wi' him?" sed her mother; "Tip, lift him up an' hug him in th'
haase, an' see what's to do! He's somebody's poor lad."

Tip was not quite so strong as he had been, but he was yet strong enough for the emergency:
and lifting up the slim young man, he bore him into the house and laid him on the longsettle.

"What does ta think is th' matter wi' him?" asked the mother; "Is he hurt?"

"Noa."

"Why, has he had a fit thinks ta?"

"Aw think he has, an' it'll be some time befoor he comes aat on it, for its a druffen fit."

"A'a, tha doesn't say soa, Tip! does ta?" "Its ten thaasand pities to see him i' that state!"

Sally approached him half in fear and half in anxiety, and after scanning his features, which
in spite of the dirt and the drink were yet handsome, she turned to her father and asked, "What
shall we do with him?"

"We shall be like to tak care on him, lass, wol he sleeps it off aw expect, for we connot turn
him aat, an' if we did th' police wod lock him up. Awve suffered a deeal i' mi lifetime wi'
my lads, but awve niver seen one on 'em i' that state, an' awd rayther follow 'em to th' grave
nor iver do it."

For hours they sat beside the sleeping man, and when it was far past their usual time of retiring
to rest, they looked at each other, mutely asking what would be best to do.

"Father and mother," said Sally, "it is time you went to bed; I know you cannot bear to miss
your accustomed rest. I will watch by this young man until he awakes, and so soon as he is
fit to leave the house he shall do so, and then I can get an hour's sleep before the shop opens
in the morning; I do not think he will sleep long now."

The old couple did not like to leave her sitting up, but seeing no reason why they too should
watch, they left her with their blessing and retired to rest.

The light from the candle fell full on the face of the sleeper, and although Sally often tried
to read one of her favourite books, yet as oft she found her eyes rivetted upon the countenance
of the man before her. At times he moaned as though in pain; again he smiled a sweet, sweet
smile so innocent and childlike, as if no care had ever crossed his path; then a deep, deep
sigh heaved his breast, as though all hope had died within it. Sally leaned over him, and tears
rolled down her cheeks as she gazed on him, and with her hand she gently parted his curly locks,
exposing a brow that rivalled her own for whiteness. She was thus occupied when his eyes slowly
opened, and she started back. He looked around him with a listlessness that showed the stupor
had not yet worn off. Presently he aroused himself, and in a husky voice asked, "Where am I?"

"You are in the house of those who have endeavoured to befriend you," she replied; "you are
quite safe, perhaps you had better try to sleep again."

"No! sleep! no! Let me have something to drink I Bring me some beer, I'm choaking."

"That I cannot do, and would not if I could; but here is some tea made nice and warm, that
will do you much more good." And as she said this she handed him the jug.

He took it from her, with a half-amused, half-astonished expression on his face, and drank
the contents at a draught. "There, there!" he muttered and reseated himself.

He looked for a short time at Sally, as she sat opposite him, but there was such an air of
dignity, mingled with compassion, imprinted on her face, that it was only after one or two
ineffectual attempts that he could articulate another word. At length he said, "Will you kindly
tell me, miss, where I am and how I came here?"

"You are in my father's house in--------street, and he carried you here. I stumbled over something
on my way home, and on going back with my parents, we found you laid helpless on the pavement.
They have gone to bed, and I am waiting until you feel able to resume your walk home."

"It must have been quite evident to you that I was in liquor, and I must have caused you great
inconvenience. I did not think there was a person in the world who would have taken so much
trouble on my behalf, but I am glad to say that I am in a position to pay for it, and you are
at liberty to help yourself," saying which, he threw a wellfilled purse upon the table.

"I beg that you will replace the purse in your pocket, sir. To any kindness you have received
you are welcome, and you would only insult my parents by offering to pay."

"Not a very enviable looking home," he muttered, "but it seems pride can dwell in a cottage."
"Just pride can dwell in the cottage as well as in the mansion I hope," she replied, rising
to open the door. "The morning is cold yet fine," she said, "and as you are, doubtless, expected
home, it may be advisable not to delay your departure."

"I will act upon your hint," he said, "but I have one favour yet to ask, Will you grant it?"

"That depends upon the nature of it."

"It is that I may be allowed to call here again, to express the gratitude I feel for the kind
manner in which you have acted towards me. At present I am not in a fit state to do so. Will
you grant me that privilege?"

"We do not seek for your thanks, sir, you are a perfect stranger to us, and we have but done
that, which we felt it our duty to do, but if it will afford you any pleasure, I am quite sure
my father will grant your request."

With a hasty "good morning," he hurried off, passing through the quiet streets as quickly as
he could, still wondering how he had got into such strange company.

Sally sought her bed, to snatch a few hours of sleep, but all desire seemed to have flown.
She could think of nothing but the young man's face as she had seen him as he slept. His dress
and manners bespoke the gentleman; but he had left no name, and she vainly endeavoured to discover
who he was.

The next day brought the young man once more to the cottage door, but in a very different state.
Sally was not at home, but the old woman invited him forward, and requested him to be seated.
"Give my best thanks to your daughter," he said, as they conversed together, "and tell her
I shall be for ever grateful to her, for she has proved as good as she is beautiful; and she
is beautiful."

"Ther's lots o' nice young wimmen ith' world," said Tip, "an shoo's one amang th' rest."

After sitting for a few minutes whilst the old woman warned him of the danger he placed himself
in by giving way to such evil habits, and having promised never again to forget himself so
far, he shook hands with the worthy couple and departed, leaving behind him a handsome sum
of money, unknown to them.

Not long after, Sally was returning home, when she met the same young man. The recognition
was mutual, and he at once joined her and strolled along by her side, pouring forth his thanks
for her kindness, and begging that she would not look upon him with disgust on account of the
unfavourable circumstances under which their first meeting took place. His manners were so
easy, and his conversation so entertaining, that they reached the end of the street in which
she lived, almost before she was aware. He bade her "good night," and struck off in an opposite
direction.

Sally's heart palpitated more quickly than usual, as she entered the house, and for some reason,
unknown even to herself, she did not acquaint her parents with the interview. She endeavoured
to occupy her mind by busying herself with the little household affairs, but her manner was
abstracted, so feigning exhaustion she went to her room, at an earlier hour than usual. She
slept, but not that deep, quiet, undisturbed slumber that wraps in oblivion all the senses.
She dreamed strange dreams, in which she saw strange faces, but the one face was ever there,
and in the morning she arose, feverish and unrefreshed.

CHAPTER II.

Some months had elapsed since Sally's first interview with young Arthur Grafton, (for such
his name proved to be,) and during that time matters had assumed a very different character.
One or two meetings seemingly accidental, led to an intimacy growing between them, which was
not easily to be mistaken.

Arthur was a young man possessing great advantages, not only in personal attractions, but as
the possessor of an ample fortune. His father had been dead many years and his mother resided
in the neighbourhood of London. No sooner, however, did Arthur attain his majority, and find
himself in such a favoured position, than he gave way to those excesses which are generally
somewhat lightly styled, youthful indiscretions. His mother had done all that lay in her to
prevail upon him to alter his course of conduct, but he being headstrong, yet affectionate,
and not wishing to cause her pain, at the same time being disinclined to follow her advice,
left home in order to be free from all restraint. Thus it happened that he was spending a porportion
of his time in Y------. Sally's parents were not blind to the state of their daughter's feelings
towards Arthur, but they were full of fear. Once or twice he had called at the cottage, and
they had marked the unnatural sparkle of his eye, that told of a too great indulgence in drink.
On one or two occasions he had openly scoffed at religion, and treated as jests, things they
held to be most sacred. They often spoke to Sally and warned her, but her usual reply was a
light laugh, or an assurance that she knew what she was doing.

Little by little she ceased to think there was anything very wrong in a young man becoming
intoxicated, if he only did it occasionally. Her attendance at church was not so regular, and
in a short time it ceased altogether, and she looked forward to the sabbath only as a day of
recreation, and one on which she could spend more time with him who was day by day leading
her farther from the path of duty.

Many a friend warned her of her danger, but her whole soul had become so wrapped up in him,
that his very vices appeared as virtues, in her eyes. Sally had not forgotten her early teachings,
and many a night when all was hushed, the still small voice of conscience whispered, 'Beware,
--Beware,' But she would not listen to it, she had set her heart upon him, and although she
could not but admit he had many faults, yet she strove to believe that she had the power to
wean him from his evil ways.

One night the old couple and their daughter were sat by their cheerful fire. Tip, as was his
wont, smoking his pipe,--the old woman bending over the oft consulted bible, and Sally with
her elbow resting upon the table and her head leaned upon her hand, gazing at the kitten sleeping
on the hearth, although she saw it note Arthur had failed to keep his appointment and she was
sad in consequence. A loud knock at the door disturbed them,--Sally hastened to open it, and
Arthur in a state of wild intoxication rushed in. Even Sally shuddered and shrank from his
attempted caresses. Her mother shook her head, and looking upward seemed to implore help from
Him of whose death she had just been reading:--whilst old Tip rose to his feet, took the pipe
from his mouth, and angrily pointed towards the door.

Drunk as Arthur was, he comprehended his meaning, but advancing towards him with uncertain
gait, he placed a hand upon each shoulder and forced him back into his seat, uttering a fearful
oath.

Sally strove to quiet him, and implored her father to excuse him, at the same time begging
of Arthur to leave the house. The consternation and excitement of those about him, seemed to
add fuel to the fire already within him, and tearing the bible from the old woman's lap, he
hurled it on the fire. Tip rushed to save it, but Arthur seized the poker and stood threatening
death to any who dared to touch it. Tip, undaunted, made another effort. The dreadful weapon
fell upon his unprotected head, and in another instant he was stretched upon the floor. The
sight of poor Tip in such a state, together with the wailing and weeping of Sally and her mother,
seemed to have the effect of sobering him a little; he threw down the poker, opened the door,
and, without a word, passed out.

CHAPTER III.

A bright spring morning succeeded the night on which the commotion had taken place in Tip's
usually quiet home. He was stirring about the house as was his custom, a bandage over his brow
being the only indication of the recent unpleasant event. The wound was not a dangerous one,
and the unceasing attention of his daughter had enabled him to rally much sooner than might
have been expected. Sally and her mother were also bustling about. Not a word escaped from
any of them in reference to what had taken place. Old Tip looked more than usually morose,
the mother, more than usually sorrowful, and Sally's brow was contracted and her lips compressed,
and her eyes spoke of fixed determination. She dressed herself with more than usual care, and
lingered over many little things before she bade her usual good morning; and when she closed
the door she gazed a moment at the old familiar structure, wiped the tears from her eyes, that
in spite or all she could do, would come to testify that her heart was not so callous as she
fain would make it appear; and then she walked rapidly away--but not to her work. No! she sought
the home of him who had come like a blight on their domestic peace. She carried with her no
feeling of resentment--her heart was full of love and compassion. She had undergone a dreadful
struggle. The climax had arrived. She must choose between her parents and her lover. It was
a hard, hard task, but it was over. House and parents, all that had been associated with her
early and happy years, sacrificed for one whose past life had brought to her so much misery.

She reached the door, rang the bell, and was ushered into the room in which Arthur sat vainly
endeavouring to recall the circumstances of the preceding night. He was pleased yet astonished
to see her, and they were quickly engaged in an earnest and hurried conversation. In a few
minutes Arthur rang the bell, and gave orders for all his boxes to be packed and conveyed to
the nearest railway station. He called for his bill which he discharged with alacrity, a hired
carriage was at the door, Arthur and Sally entered it and she returned home no more.

The grief of her parents was very great when they knew that she had left them, and they anxiously
waited for some tidings of her whereabouts, but no tidings came. For a time remittances of
money came regularly, but these suddenly stopped, and their only means of subsistence was gone.

The articles of furniture were disposed of one by one, to supply the cravings of appetite,
but they were soon exhausted, and one morning saw them placed in a cart and taken to the workhouse.
They had both been gradually sinking since Sally's flight, and it was but a short time after
the removal from their home, that the parish hearse removed them to the last home of all flesh
in this world. The fact of their ever having existed seemed to be almost forgotten, when a
painful tragedy revived it in the minds of those who had known them. When newspapers gave the
distressing account of a young woman having leaped from London Bridge into the river, bearing
in her arms a little babe. They were taken out quite dead, and on being searched, a piece of
paper with the following words written upon it was all that was found.

'Let my dreadful fate be a warning to the young. I was young and beautiful,--I became proud
and ambitious,--I ceased to lend an ear to the kind counsel of my parents,--I ceased to look
upon sin with abhorence,--I sought pleasure in iniquity,--the torments of hell can be no worse
than those I have endured, my seducer lives to make other victims,--my babe dies with me, lest
it should ever live to know its parent's shame,--I go to meet my God,--a Murderess and a Suicide.
My only hope is in His unbounded mercy, and the intercession of His Son. SALLY GREEN.

Reader, does not this little story teach a moral? I think it does. Be not proud of the personal
attractions with which nature has blessed you. Shun evil company,--obey your parents, and fear
God always. Sally Green's case is not an isolated one. There are thousands at the present moment,
who are pressing on in the same path that terminated so dreadfully for her. Watch and pray,
lest it should be your unhappy lot to be described in old Tip's expressive words, as 'One amang
th' rest.'

What's yor Hurry?

Ther's nowt done weel 'ud's done in a hurry, unless its catchin a flea, aw've heeard sed, but
Joa Trailer wod'nt ha believed 'at that should be done in a hurry, for he hurried for nowt.
It wor allus sed 'at he wor born to th' tune o'th' Deead March, an suckled wi' Slowman's Soothin
Syrup. His mother declared a better child nivver lived, for he hardly ivver cried, net even
for his sops, for if he showed signs o' startin, ther wor allus time enuff to get' em made
befoor he'd getten fairly off. He began cuttin his teeth when he wor six months old, an' he'd
nobbut getten two when his birthday coom, an' when th' old wimmen used to rub his gums wi ther
fingers he used to oppen his een an' stare at 'em as if he wondered what they wor i' sich a
hurry for. His mother wor forty-five year old when he wor born, an' shoo anlls sed he wor born
sadly too lat, an' if that's th' case ther's noa wonder 'at he's allus behund hand, for ther's
nowt can ivver mak him hurry to mak up for lost time.

They sent him to a schooil an' paid tuppince a wick for him, but they mud as weel ha saved
ther brass, for if they managed to get him to start i' time, he just contrived to get thear
when it wor lowsin. He nivver leearned owt but he sed he meant to do sometime, but ther wor
time enuff yet: soa he grew up to be a big ovvergrown ignoramus, an' his mother could'nt tell
what to do wi him. Shoo put him 'prentice to a cobbler, but his maister sent him hooam when
he'd been thear a month, for he sed he'd been tryin to spetch a pair o' child's clogs ivver
sin he went, an' 'at th' rate he wor gettin on wi 'em he'd have' em thrown on his hands, for
th' child ud be grown up befoor they wor finished.

"What am aw to do wi' thi," sed his mother, "aw can't afford to keep thi to laik?"

"Wait a bit," he said, "'an give a chap a chonce. Yor i' sich a hurry abaat iverything. Rome
worn't built in a day."

"Noa, an' if it had depended o' sich as thee it nivver wod ha been built, awm thinkin!"

One day, as he wor sittin on a stoop at th' loin end, a chap com ridin up to him, an' ax'd
him if he'd hold his horse for him a minit or two. "Eea," he said, "tak for time a bit an awl
hold it."

It tuk him some time to sydle up an tak hold o'th' reins, an then th' chap left him, tellin
him whativver else to stand thear an' net run away wi' it.

"Awst nooan run far," he sed, an' in abaat ten minits he laft all over his face at th' idea
o' sich a thing. It wor a varry quiet horse, an' Joa thowt 'at he'd getten th' reight seoart
ov a job at last, an' When th' chap coom back he gave him a shillin. If he'd been slow i' other
things, he had'nt been vany slow i' leearnin th' vally o' brass, an' as it wor th' furst time
he'd ivver had a shillin he wor soa excited 'at he started off hooam at a jog trot, an' th'
fowk 'at knew him wor soa capt wol they could'nt tell what to mak on it, but they thowt he
must be havin' a race wi' some sooapsuds at wor runnin daan th' gutter; but that wornt it,
for he'd getten a noashun at noa trade ud suit him as weel as fishin, for he could tak his
own time wi' that, an' he felt sewer he'd be lucky, for if they wor'nt inclined to nibble he'd
caar thear wol they'd be glad to bite to get shut on him; an' he'd seen a fishin rod to sell
for a shillin, soa he thowt he'd goa hooam an' as sooin as he'd getten his dinner he'd buy it.

When he gate in, his mother said, "Whear's ta been, an' whativer is ther to do 'at maks thi
come in puffin an' blowin like that?"

"Aw've been to th' end o'th' loin," he sed, "an' wol aw wor thear a chap coom an' ax'd me to
hold his horse for him, an' he's glen me a shillin."

"Well, tha's been sharp for once, an' awm fain to see it, for its a comfort to know at owt
can stir thi. Gie me' that shillin, its just come i' time, for aw wor at my wits end what to
do for a bit o' dinner, an' that'll just come in to get a bit o' summat."

Joa pottered it aght, an' as shoo took' it shoo sed, "Nah, tha sees what it is to be sharp.--Tha's
done rarely this' mornin."

"Eea, aw see what it is to be sharp, an' if ivver yo catch me sharp agean yo may call me sharp,
for if aw had'nt run hooam 'fit to braik me neck aw should ha had that shillin.--But it sarves
me reight to loise it for bein i' sich a hurry."

He wor as gooid as his word, an' he's nivver been known to hurry sin.

When he gate to be a man he fancied he wor i' love wi' a young woman 'at lived claise to his
mother's,--one at wor just as queer a karacter as hissen, wi this difference, shoo could haddle
her own livin wi weshin.

He tell'd his mother 'at he meant to ax her to have him somday, an' shoo sed shoo wor feeared
he'd think abaat it wol they'd be booath too old; but he did'nt, for he met her one day an'
he ax'd her if shoo'd nivver thowt o' sich a thing?

"Nay," shoo sed, "sich a thowt's nivver entered mi heead, an' if it had aw should nivver ha'
thawt o' thee,--but awm i' noa hurry to get wed."

"Noa moor am aw," he sed, "but aw thawt awd mention it, an' tha can tak thi own time,--all
aw want to know is, if tha'll have me when tha's made up thi mind?"

"Tha'd suit me weel enuff Joa, if tha'd owt to do, but aw can't wesh to keep misen an' have
thee sittin o' th' harstun for a ornament, thar't hardly gooid lukkin enuff for that;--if tha'll
stir thisen an' get some wark awl tawk to thi."

Soa Joa left her to consider on it, an' he determined to try if he could'nt find summat to
do. As he wor creepin on a chap ovvertuk him an says, "What are ta up to nah, Joa?"

"Awm seekin wark!"

"Why, if tha keeps on at that speed awm feeard tha'll nivver find ony, for if it wur anent
thi tha could'nt ovvertak it.

"Awm nooan tryin to ovvertak it,--but tha sees if ther's ony comin behund it'll have a chonce
o' overtakkin me, an' if aw wor go in faster it might think aw wor tryin to get aght o'th'
way on it: an' whativer fowk may say, awm net one o' them 'ats feeard o' wark, for aw nivver
put misen aght oth' way to shirk owt yet."

"Noa, nor to seek owt nawther; but aw heeard ov a job this mornin at'll just suit thi."

"What wor it?"

"Old Rodger wants a chap to drive his heears, an' its just the job for thee, for th' horse
knows th' way to th' Cemetary, an' tha'll have nowt to do but sit o'th box. Tha'd better see
after it."

"Aw think aw will sometime this afternooin," he sed, "aw could just manage that sooart o' wark."

"Tha'd better goa nah if tha meeans to luk after it, or tha may be too lat,--but gooid mornin,
aw hav'nt time to stand here ony longer."

"Aw doant know whether to believe him or net," he sed, "for aw think he's nooan reight in his
heead, or he'd nivver ha' spokken abaat standin' here when we've been walkin' all th' time.
But ther can be noa harm i' gooin to see after it, an' if aw get it, Abergil can have noa excuse
for refusin' me."

It tuk him a long time to get to Rodger's tho' it wor'nt aboon hauf a mile, an' when he tell'd
what he'd come for, Rodger lukt at him an' sed "Well, tha'll do varry weel as far as thi face
an' figger's consarned, for tha luks as solid as a tombstun, but if aw gie thi th' job tha
mun promise to drive as a'w tell thi, for aw seckt th' last chap aw had becoss he wod drive
ta fast when he wor aght o' mi seet; an' tha knows ther's nowt luks wor nor a gallopin funeral,
an' aw want somdyaw can trust."

"Yo, can trust me, an if yo'll gie me th' job aw warrant awl, drive just as slow as yo want.
But what's th'wage?"

"Ten shillin a wick, an' tha'll have as mich curran cake an' warm ale as tha can teim into
thi, an' thi clooas all fun for nowt."

"Awl tak it, an' yo can let me know when awm to start."

"Tha'l have to start to-day, for old. "I shall keep a vacant place for you by my side," said Ella,
"so that we may feast together, my son, when the king releases you;
it is a great honour that he should think of you now."

Elfric followed the messenger, who led him into the interior of the palace, where he found Edwy
impatiently awaiting him in the royal dressing chamber.

Elfric had expected to find the newly-crowned king deeply impressed, but if such had been the
case, at the moment it had passed away.

"Thanks to all the saints, including St. George, and especially the
dragon, that I can look into your jolly face again, Elfric, it is
a relief after all the grim-beards who have surrounded me today.

I shudder when I think of them."

Elfric had been about to kneel and kiss the royal hand, in token of
homage, but Edwy saw the intention and prohibited him.

"No more of that an thou lovest me, Elfric; my poor hand is almost worn out already."

"The day must have tired you, the scene was so exciting."

Edwy yawned as he replied, "Thank God it is over; I thought Odo was going to preach to me all day,
and the incense almost stifled me; the one good thing is that it
is done now, and all England--Kent, Sussex, Wessex, Essex, Northumbria,
East Anglia, and Mercia--have all acknowledged me as their liege lord,
the Basileus of Britain.

What is done can't be undone, and Dunstan may eat his leek now, and go to fight Satan again."

Elfric
looked up in some surprise.

"What do you think, my friend; who do you suppose is here in the palace, in the royal apartments?"

"Who?"

"Elgiva,
the fair Elgiva, the lovely Elgiva, dear Elgiva, and her mother. Oh, but I shall love to look
upon her face when the feast is done, and the grim-beards have gone!"

"But Dunstan?"

"Dunstan may go and hang himself; he can't scrape off the consecrated oil, or carry away crown,
bracelet, and sceptre, to hide with the other royal treasures at Glastonbury; but the feast
is beginning, and you must come and sit on my right hand."

"No, no," said Elfric, who saw at once what an impropriety this would be, "not yet; besides, my
old father is here, and has kept a seat beside himself for me."

"Well, goodbye for the present; I shall expect you after the feast. Elgiva will be glad to
see you."

Elfric returned to his father, but a feeling of sadness had taken possession of him, an apprehension
of coming evil.

The feast began; the clergy and the nobility of the land were assembled in the great hail of the
palace, and there was that profusion of good cheer which befitted the day, for the English
were, like their German ancestors, in the habit of considering the feast an essential part of any
solemnity.

How much was eaten and drunk upon the occasion it would be dangerous to say, for it would probably
exceed all modern experience, but it seemed to the impatient Edwy that the feast and the subsequent
drinking of pledges and healths would never end, and he was impatient the whole time to get
away and be in the company of the charmer.

An opportunity seemed at last to offer itself to his immature judgment. Gleemen had sung, harpers
had harped, but the excitement culminated when Siward, a Northumbrian
noble, who was a great musician, and skilful in improvisation, did
not disdain, like the royal Alfred, to take the harp and pour forth
an extemporary ode of great beauty, whereupon the whole multitude
rose to their feet and waved their wine cups in the air, in ardent
appreciation of the patriotic sentiments he had uttered, and the beauty
of the music and poetry.

During the full din of their heated applause, when all eyes were fixed upon the accomplished
musician, Edwy rose softly from his chair; a door was just behind
him, and he took advantage of it to leave the hail and thread the
passages quickly, till he came to the room where he had left Elgiva,
when he threw aside his royal mantle and all his restraint at the
same time.

It was not for a few moments that the company in the hall discovered
the absence of their king, but when they did there was a sudden hush,
and men looked at each other in mute astonishment; it appeared to
all, with scarce an exception, a gross insult to the assembled majesty
of the nation.

[xiii]

Poor Edwy, in his thoughtlessness and want of proper feeling, little knew the deep anger such
a proceeding would cause; in his lack of a reverential spirit he was constantly, as we have seen,
offending against the respect due to the Church, the State, or himself--first as heir presumptive,
then as king.

Men stood mute, as we have said, then murmurs of indignation at the
slight arose, and all looked at Dunstan.

He beckoned to Cynesige of Lichfield, who came to his side.

"We must bring this thoughtless boy back," he said, "or great harm will be done."

"But how?"

"By persuasion, if possible. Follow me."

The two prelates entered the interior of the palace, and sought the king's private chamber.

As
they drew near they heard the sound of merry laughter, and each of them frowned as men might
do who were little accustomed to condone the weakness of human flesh. Entering the chamber
very unceremoniously, they paused, as if aghast, when they beheld the king in the company of
Elgiva, his royal diadem cast upon the ground.

He started in surprise, and for a moment in fear; then, remembering who he was, he exclaimed,
angrily--"How dare you, sir monk, intrude upon the privacy of your king, unbidden?"

"We do so as the ambassadors of the King of kings."

It is out of our power to describe the scene which followed, the fiery
words of Edwy, the stern yet quiet rejoinders of the churchmen, the
tears of the mother and daughter; but it is well known how the scene
ended.

Edwy absolutely refused to return to the assembled guests, saying
he would forfeit his kingdom first; and Dunstan replied that for his
(Edwy's) own sake he should then be compelled to use force, and suiting
the action to the word, he and Cynesige took each an arm of the youthful
king, and led him back by compulsion to the assembled nobles and clergy.

Before

condemning Dunstan, we must remember that Elgiva could not stand in
the relation of the affianced bride of the king; that Edwy really
seemed to set the laws of both Church and State at defiance, those
very laws which but that day he had sworn solemnly to maintain; and
that but recently he had stood in the relation of pupil to Dunstan,
so that in his zeal for Church and State, the abbot forgot the respect
due to the king.

He saw only the boy, and forgot the sovereign.

The guests assembled in the banqueting hall had seen the desertion of their royal master with
murmurs both loud and deep; but when they saw him return escorted by Dunstan and Cynesige,
their unanimous approval showed that in their eyes the churchmen
had taken a proper step.

Yet, although Edwy tried to make a show of having returned of his own free will, an innocent device
at which his captors connived when they entered the hall with him,
the bitterest passions were rankling in his heart, and he determined
to take a terrible revenge, should it ever be in his power, upon Dunstan.

There

was comparatively little show of merriment during the rest of the feast, and the noble company
separated earlier than was usual on such occasions.

"If this be the way King Edwy treats his guests," said the Earl of Mercia, "he will find scant
loyalty north of the Thames."

"Nor in East Anglia," said another.

"There is another of the line of Cerdic living."

"Yes, Edgar, his brother."

"Dunstan and Cynesige brought him back with some difficulty, I'll
be bound."

"Yes; although he tried to smile, I saw the black frown hidden beneath."

"He

will take revenge for all this."

"Upon whom?"

"Why, upon Dunstan to be sure."

"But how can he?

Dunstan is too powerful for that."

"Wait and see."

Such was the general tone of the conversation, from which the sentiments of the community might
be inferred.

Elfric went, as he had been bidden to do, at the conclusion of the feast, to seek Edwy, and found
him, it is needless to state, in a towering rage.

"Elfric," he said, "am I a king? or did I dream I was crowned today?"

"You certainly were."

"And yet these insolent monks have dared to force me from the company of Elgiva to return to
that sottish feast, and what is worse, I find they have dared to send her and her mother home
under an escort, so that I cannot even apologise to them. As I live, if I am a king I will
have revenge."

"I trust so, indeed," said Elfric, "they deserve death."

"I would it were in my power to inflict it; but this accursed monk--I
go mad when I mention his name--is all too powerful.

I believe Satan helps him."

"Still there may be ways, if you only wait till you can look around you."

"There may indeed."

"Only have patience; all will be in your hands some day."

"And if it be in my power I will restore the worship of Woden and Thor, and burn every monk's
nest in the land."

"They were at least the gods of warriors."

"Elfric, you will stand by me, will you not?"

"With my life."

"Come to the window, now; see the old sots departing. There a priest, there a thane, there an
earl--all drunk, I do believe; don't you think so?"

"Yes, yes," said Elfric, disregarding the testimony of both his eyes that they were all perfectly
sober.

Just then his eye caught a very disagreeable object, and he turned
somewhat pale.

"What are you looking at?" said Edwy.

"There is that old fox, Dunstan, talking with my father; he will learn that I am here."

"What does it matter?"

"Only that he will easily persuade my father to take me home."

"Then the commands of a king must outweigh those of a father. I have heard Dunstan say a king
is the father of all his people, and I command you to stay."

"I want to stay with all my heart."

"Then you shall, even if I
have to make a pretence of detaining you by force."

The anticipations
of Elfric were not far wrong. Dunstan had found out the truth. He
had sought out the old thane to condole with him upon the pain he
supposed he must recently have inflicted by his letter.

"I cannot
express to you, my old friend and brother," he said, "the great pain
with which I sent your poor boy Elfric home, but it was a necessity."

"Sent
him home?" said Ella.

"Yes, at the time our lamented Edred died."

"Sent
him home!" repeated Ella, in such undisguised amazement that Dunstan
soon perceived something was amiss, and in a few short minutes became
possessed of the whole facts, while Ella learnt his son's disgrace.

They
conferred long and earnestly. The father's heart was sorely wounded,
but he could not think that Elfric would resist his commands, and
he promised to take him back at once to Aescendune, where he hoped
all would soon be well--"soon, very soon," he said falteringly.

So
the old thane went to his lodgings, hard by the palace, where he awaited
his son.

Late in the evening Elfric arrived, his countenance flushed
with wine: he had been seeking courage for the part he had to play
in the wine cup.

Long and painful, most painful, was the interview
that followed. Hardened in his rebellion, the unhappy Elfric defied
his father's authority and justified his sin, flatly refusing to return
home, in which he pretended to be justified by "the duty a subject
owed to his sovereign."

Thus roused to energy, Ella solemnly adjured
his boy to remember the story of his uncle Oswald, and the sad fate
he had met with. It was very seldom indeed that Ella alluded to his
unhappy brother, the story was too painful; but now that Elfric seemed
to be commencing a similar course of disobedience, the example of
the miserable outlaw came too forcibly to his mind to be altogether
suppressed.

"Beware, my son," added Ella, "lest the curse which fell
upon Oswald fall upon you, and your younger brother succeed to your
inheritance."

"It is not a large one," said Elfric, "and in that
case, the king whom I serve will find me a better one."

"Is it not
written, 'Put not your trust in princes?' O my son, my son; you will
bring my grey hairs with sorrow to the grave!"

It was of no avail.
The old thane arose in the morning with the intention of taking Elfric
home even by force, such force as Dunstan had used, if necessary,
but found that the youth had disappeared in the night; neither could
he learn what had become of him, but he shrewdly guessed that the
young king could have told him.

Broken-hearted by his son's cruel
desertion, the thane of Aescendune returned home alone.

CHAPTER IX.
GLASTONBURY ABBEY.

Rich in historical associations and reputed sanctity,
the abbey of Glastonbury was the ecclesiastical centre of western
England. Here grew the holy thorn which Joseph of Arimathea had planted
when, fatigued with travel, he had struck his staff into the ground,
and lo! a goodly tree; here was the holy well of which he had drunk,
and where he baptized his converts, so that its waters became possessed
of miraculous power to heal diseases.

Here again were memorials,
dear to the vanquished Welsh; for did not Arthur, the great King Arthur,
the hero of a thousand fights, the subject of gleeman's melody and
of the minstrel's praise, lie buried here? if indeed he were dead,
and not spirited away by magic power.

A Welsh population still existed
around the abbey, for it was near the borders of West Wales, as a
large portion of Devon and Cornwall was then called, and Exeter had
not long become an English town. [xiv] The legends of Glastonbury
were nearly all of that distant day when the Saxons and Angles had
not yet discovered Britain, and she reposed safe under the protection
of mighty Rome; hence, it was the object of pilgrimage and of deep
veneration to all those of Celtic blood, while the English were unwilling
to be behind in their veneration.

Here, in the first year of the
great English king Athelstane, Dunstan was born, the son of Herstan
and Kynedred, both persons of rank--a man destined to influence the
Anglo-Saxon race first in person and then in spirit for generations--the
greatest man of his time, whether, as his contemporaries thought,
mighty for good, or, as men of narrower minds have thought, mighty
for evil.

In his early youth, Glastonbury lay, as it lies now, in
ruin and decay; the Danes had ravaged it, and its holy walls were
no longer eloquent with prayer and praise. Yet the old inhabitants
still talked with regret of the departed glories of the fane; the
pilgrim and the stranger still visited the consecrated well, hoping
to gain strength from its healing wave, for the soil had been hallowed
by the blood of martyrs and the holy lives of saints; here kings and
nobles, laying aside their greatness, had retired to prepare for the
long and endless home, and in the calm seclusion of the cloister had
found peace.

Here the mind of the young Dunstan was moulded for his
future work; here, weak in body, but precocious in intellect, he drew
in, as if with his vital breath, legend and tradition; here, from
a body of Scottish missionaries, or, as we should now call them, Irish,[xv]
he learned with rapidity all that a boy could acquire of civil or
ecclesiastical lore, and both in Latin and in theology his progress
amazed his tutors.

Up to this time the world had held possession
of his heart, and, balancing the advantages of a religious and a secular
life, he chose, as most young people would choose, the attractions
of court, to which his parents' rank entitled him, and leaving Glastonbury
he repaired to the court of Edmund.
Nah, aw've nooaticed 'at Bessy allus blushes when shoo comes to buy owt o' me, an' shoo luks
onywhear else rayther nor shoo'll luk at me; an' shoo strokes th' owd donkey's nooas an' maks
a fuss on him, an' even gies him th' carrot tops, an' he munches' em up an' luks at me as mich
as to say--'This is her Joa; spaik up like a man an' tha'll win;' an' latly he's begun to rawt
as sooin as iver we've getten into th' end o' th' street, an' aw tak that for a gooid sign,
for yo know Jerusalem wod do owt for me. An' nah as aw've finished mi supper aw'll be off.'

'Well, lad, aw wish thi weel, but awm feeard. Aw think if aw wor thee aw should want summat
moor nor a donkey rawtin to set me off o' sich a eearand as that. Listen! does ta hear it nah?
It's a rawtin agean. Can ta tell me what that means?'

'Nay, by gow, aw dooant know. Aw think it must meean 'luk sharp.''

'Aw think it meeans tha'rt a choolter heead, that's what aw think.'

'Neer heed, mother; yo'll see when aw come back.'

Soa off Joa went, full o' faith. When he gate aghtside, th' mooin wor just risin, an' th' stars
wor sparklin up i'th' sky, an' all wor clear an' still. It wor a gooid two miles to Bessy's,
an' he'd time to think a bit; an' he kept turnin over in his mind what his mother had sed abaght
gooin cracked, an' he began to have some daats as to whether he wor altogether square or net.
'A'a,' he sed, 'aw've missed it this time, for aw mud ha browt her a heearin or some oonions
for her supper, but it's just like me, aw allus think o' thease things when it's too lat--aw
must ha been born a bit to lat; but what awm to do, or what awm to say when aw get to owd Stooansnatche's
aw connot tell. But fortune favors th' brave,' an' aw have been lucky befoor, soa aw'll hooap
to be lucky agean.'

Joa wor fast lessenin th' distance between hissen an' th' haase whear owd Stooansnatch lived,
an' it worn't long befoor he stood peepin in at th' winder. He couldn't see owt, for all wor
as dark as a booit inside. He then began tryin to mak up a speech, or frame some mak ov excuse
for comin, but he wor clean lick'd, for moor he tried, an' th' farther off he seemed to get,
an he began to think 'at if he went on studdyin mich longer it ud end in him gooin back baght
dooin owt, soa he screwed up his pluck an' knocked at th' door. He could hear a mumblin an'
scufflin inside, an' somdy strike a match, an' in a bit he heeard somdy unlock two or three
locks, an' shooit five or six bolts, an' then th' door oppened abaght two inch, an' a nooas
'at iverybody knew belang'd to owd Stooansnatch bobbed aght.

'What does ta want at this time o'th' neet?' sed th' owd man.

'Nay, nowt particlar; but didn't yo give me hauf-a-craan amang that copper this mornin, think
yo? Aw shouldn't like to wrang onybody, an' aw did get hauf-a-craan somewhere.'

Th' door oppened in a minit, an' Joa went in. He knew weel enuff 'at th' hauf craan didn't
belang to th' owd sinner, but he didn't care as he'd getten in an' Bessy wor sittin bi th'
side o'th' fire lukkin bonnier, he thowt nor iver.

Owd Stooansnatch wor reckonin to caant up his brass, an' in a bit he says,--'Tha'rt reight,
Joa, lad, it's mine; awm just hauf-a-craan short, soa tha can give it me.'

Joa hadn't heeard a word o' this speech, for his een wor fixed o' Bessy. an' his maath wor
oppen as if he wor gooin to swallow her. Bessy wor blushin, an' seemed varry mich takken up
wi' her toa 'at had popt throo th' end ov her slipper.

'Does ta hear me?' he sed sharply, 'aw tell thi it's mine, an' tha mun give it me, an' dooant
stand starin thear! Gi me that brass, an' then tak thisen off hooam! aw connot affooard to
keep a cannel burnin this rooad for nowt.'

'Why, thear's th' brass,' sed Joa, flinging it on to th' table. 'Aw should think it owt to
pay for a cannel or two.'

'It's nowt to thee what it'll pay for! but tha's noa need to sit daan thear for we're gooin
to bed, an' soa tha mun goa.'

'Well dooan't bi i' sich a hurry abbat it, awm net goin to stop all th' neet yo needn't think,
but aw've another bit o' business to see yo abaat, 'at'll be moor i' yer way nor that hauf-craan's
been.'

'Well if that's th' case tha con stop a bit an' aw'll put th' cannel aght, for we can tawk
i'th' dark. An' nah tell me what it is.'

'Yo see,' sed Joa, 'aw've been thinkin 'at it ud be a trouble to yo to loise yor dowter, for
aw know shoo's a gooid lass.'

'Shoo's a extravagant hussey, that's what shoo is,' sed Stooansnatch, 'for shoo's just gien
a booan away 'at's niver been stew'd nobbut once.'

'Why shoo mayn't be just as careful as yo, shoo's young yet; but then aw dooant think if her
an' me gate wed withaat iver lettin yo know 'at yo'd be altogether suited.'

'Wed! Wed! Who says shoo's gooin to get wed? Wed! what to a bit ov a puttaty hawker? If tha
mentions sich a thing to me aw'll bundle thi aght o'th' door i' quick sticks.'

'Well, aw have mentioned it, an' aw'st mention it agean if aw like; an' as for shovin me aght
o'th' door, aw'll forgi yo if yo do that.' An Joa quietly gate up an' locked th' door an' put
th' key in his pocket.

When owd Stooansnatch saw that he lauped aght of his cheer, fooamin at th' maath like a mad
dog. 'What are ta baan to do? Does ta want to rob me? Aw'll mak thee pay for this!'

'Yo can call it robbin if yo like, but what aw've coom for is yor dowter, an' aw mean to have
her unless shoo says noa, an' aw dooant think her heart's hard enuff for that,' sed Joa lukkin
at her. But Bessy niver spaik, an' shoo seemed as if shoo could see nowt but th' toa aght o'th'
end ov her slipper.

'Tha nasty ragamuffin! Tha impident scamp! Oppen that door! If tha doesn't aw'll fetch th'
perleece! Aw'd rayther bury her alive nor tha should have her!'

'Why yo needn't get into sich a fit abaat it fayther (for aw suppooas aw may call yo fayther
nah), yo know sich things--'

'Fayther! Fayther! Whose fayther? Awm nooan thy fayther nor likely to be! Aw'd rayther pairt
wi' ivery hawpeny aw have nor iver think 'at tha wor owt to me!'

'Well, Bessy's fayther'll be my fayther when we get wed, an' aw dooan't see what ther is to
be 'shamed on i' that. But aw think yo'd better put a bit o' coil on th' foir for it's rayther
a cooil neet.'

'Awst put noa coil on th' foir, aw con tell thi that. Aw havn't getten my brass wi' burnin
coil at this time o'th' neet. Aw hooap tha'll be frozzen to th' deeath if tha doesn't goa.'

'Noa fear abaat me bein frozzen, becoss if yo d'ooant put some on aw will, soa crack that nut,
fayther.'

'Aw'll crack thy nut if tha touches ony coils here!' sed Stooansnatch, seizin hold o'th' pooaker,
'aw'll do that for thee an' sharply if tha doesn't hook it.'

'If yo cannot keep yor temper better nor that aw should advise yo to goa to bed an' leave Bessy
an' me to talk matters ovver a bit; an' awm net gooin to caar here an' get mi deeath o' cold
for th' sake ov a bit ov coil aw can tell yo,' an' Joa tuk th' coil basket an' emptied it onto
th' foir. 'Nah then just leearn me that pooaker, or else scale it yorsen fayther, an' then
we shall have a bit o' leet.' But Stooansnatch kept fast hold o'th' pooaker, soa Joa scaled
it wi' th' tongs.

'Yo happen havn't owt to sup i'th' haase Bessy, have yo?' he sed, spaikin to her for th' first
time since he'd takken possession. But still Bessy seem'd altogether takken up wi th' toa 'at
wor peepin aght ov her slipper.

'Dooan't be 'shamed lass, dooan't be 'shamed, thi fayther'll be all reight in a bit. Come an'
let's gie thi a kuss,' he sed, stoopin ovver her an' puttin his arm raand her waist.

This wor moor nor owd Stooansnatch could stand, soa swingin th' pooaker aboon his heead, he
browt it daan wi' a fearful crack onto th' heead o' poor Joa, who at once reel'd ovver an fell
insensible to th' graand.

Terrified when he saw what he'd done, Stooansnatch let th' pooaker fall, an' Bessy jump'd up
wringin her hands an' cryin 'Oh, fayther! yo've killed him! yo've killed him! Oh, Joa, Joa,
spaik to me! What shall we do? Fayther bring a leet sharp!'

But that wor aght o'th' question, for his hand tremeld soa 'at he couldn't leet a cannel, soa
Bessy had to leet it, an' then shoo bent ovver th' form ov poor Joa. A little crimson stream
wor slowly formin a pool abaat his heead, an' his pale face luk'd soa awful wi' his jet black
hair araand his brow, 'at Bessy seemed ommast as terrified as her fayther. But tho' shoo wor
scared for a minnit shoo sooin gate ovver it, an' set to bind up his heead an' place it carefully
on a cushion. Then shoo bathed his face wi' watter, but still ther wor noa sign o' life.

'Aw didn't mean to hit him soa hard, Bessy, awm sure aw didn't.'

'Yo'll be hung for it as sure as yor standin thear, an' then what's to come o' me, left withaat
onybody to care for me?'

Owd Stooansnatch could say nowt for a long time, but at last he sed, 'Bessy, put thi hand in
his pocket for th' door kay. Aw think aw'd better fotch a doctor.'

Bessy felt backward at putting her hand i' his pocket, but shoo did soa, an' handed th' kay
to her fayther, an' in a varry short time he wor hobblin off for a doctor.

Bessy kept bathing his heead, an' in a while he slowly oppened his een an' luk'd raand. 'Ha
does ta feel, Joa?' axed Bessy, in a voice as tender as if shoo'd been talkin to a babby. 'Whativer
will thi mother say?'

This sooart o' tawk browt Joa to his senses. 'Well, Bessy,' he sed, 'my mother tell'd me aw
wor gooin cracked bat aw think awm brokken nah. Whear's thi fayther?'

'Gooan for a doctor; he thinks tha'rt killed, an' he's terrified aght ov his wits.'

'Well, if my heead worn't pratty thick, aw should ha done sellin puttates. But, Bessy, if aw
come raand all reight will ta be mi wife? Tell me that?'

'Hold thi noise; tha munnot talk--sithee ha thi heead's bleedin.'

'Neer heed it! My heart'll bleed too if tha willn't ha me;--nah, lass, what says ta?'

'Tha knows mi fayther'll niver agree to it, soa what's th' use o' talkin.'

'But will ta agree to it if he does? That's what aw want to know?'

'If tha'll nobbut hold thi noise aw'll agree to owt;--tha luks moor like burryin nor weddin.'

'Well, that's settled, an' aw'll tell thi ha aw con get top-side o'th' old man. Dunnot say
a word abaat me havin come raand, an' when th' doctor comes aw'll put him up to a thing.'

Just then th' door oppen'd, an' Stooansnatch an' th' doctor coom in. Joa shut his een an' tried
to luk as deead as he could. Th' doctor felt his pulse, an' luk'd at his heead, an' sed, 'we
must get this man to bed, it seems to me that his skull is fractured.'

'Do yo think he's likely to dee?' axed Stooansnatch.

'Well, it's very doubtful; it's a bad case, but we must make the best of it, so help me to
get him to bed.'

They all three tuk hold on him, an' wi' a deeal o' trouble managed to get him into Bessy's
room, an' to bed. 'Now then, get some brandy an' some stickin plaister,--Bessy can fetch it.'

'Na, aw'll fotch it; aw con get it cheaper,' sed Stooansnatch. An' off he went, wonderin ha
mich he could save aght o'th' hauf craan Joa'd gien him.

As sooin as he'd gooan, Joa oppened his een, an' raisin hissen up on his elbow an' winkin at
th' doctor, he sed, 'doctor, con yo keep a saycret?'

Th' doctor wor soa capt wol he ommost fell into th' assnuck, an' withaat waitin for him to
spaik, Joa sed, 'yo see aw've had a nasty knock, an aw mean to mak owd Stooansnatch pay for it.'

'Certainly! Quite proper! Sue him for £100 damages. I'll attend as a witness.'

'But that isn't th' way aw want to mak him pay for it. Aw dooan't want his brass, aw want his
dowter, an' it's becoss aw axed him for her 'at he crack'd mi heead. Nah, if yo can nobbut
mak him believe 'at this is a varry bad case, an' freeten him wi' makkin him believe 'at aw
shall niver get better, aw think we can manage it.'

'Capital! capital!' sed th' doctor, rubbin his hands wi' glee (for he wor noa fonder o' Stooansnatch
nor th' rest o' fowk) 'th' very thing! You can depend on me. Ah! here he comes.'

Joa shut his een, an th' doctor lained ovver him as if he wor examinin his heead, an' Bessy
stood wi' her apron up to her face as if shoo wor cryin, but shoo wor laughin fit to split,
for shoo could enjoy a joke at th' owd man's expense as weel as onybody.

Owd Stooansnatch coom in traidin of his tip tooas, holdin a roll o' plaister i' one hand an'
sixpenoth o' brandy i'th' tother.

Th' doctor luk'd at him an' pool'd a long face an' sed, 'I'm afraid its of no use, Mr. Stooansnatch;
this is a bad case, and had better be taken to the hospital.'

'Will it be cheaper to have him thear nor at home?' sed Stooansnatch.

'That I can't tell, but I shall be compelled to give you into custody. Murder is a sad thing,
Mr. Stooansnatch--a terrible thing, sir; and the hanging of an old man is an awful thing to
contemplate.'

'Murder? hanging? Aw didn't do it! They'll niver hang me for it, will they? A'a dear, what'll
come o' Bessy an' all my bit o' brass? Keep him here, doctor, an' try to cure him; aw dooant
care if it costs a paand,' an th' old man trembled wol he had to steady hissen agean th' bed
pooast.

Joa had kept quiet as long as he could, an for fear o' spoilin it all wi' laffin, he set up
a groan laad enuff to wakken a deead en.

'Poor fellow,' sed th' doctor, givin him a drop o' brandy, 'that's a fearful groan.' He then
cut a lot o' hair, an' put on abaat six inch square o' plaister, an' leavin him, went into
th' next room wi' owd Stooansnatch, leavin Bessy an' Joa together, an' yo may bet Joa made
gooid use of his time, for he'd begun his cooartin i' hard earnest, an' he meant to goa throo
wi' it. What they sed to one another aw dooant know, but aw suppoas they talk'd th' same sooart
o' fooilery as other fowk, an' believed it. Haiver, ther's one thing sartin, they coom to understand
one another varry weel, or if they didn't, they thowt they did.

When th' doctor an' th' owd man wor i'th' next room, an' th' door shut, th' doctor sed, 'Tell
me all about this affair,--how it happened, and tell me the truth, for if he dies, the law
will require me to state all I know, and perhaps it might be possible to have the sentence
commuted to transportation for life instead of hanging.'

'Oh, doctor, do get me aght o' this scrape if yo can. Aw'll tell yo all abaat it, an' yo tell
me what to do.'

Soa he tell'd him all just as it happened, an' when he'd finished th' doctor luk'd wise for
a minit or two, an' then he sed, varry slowly an' solemnly, 'so you spilt a fellow creature's
blood because he wanted to marry your daughter. The case looks very bad--very bad.'

'What mun aw do, doctor? Connot you tell me what to do?'

'I can only see one way, and that is, if we could bring him to consciousness, and get a minister
to marry them before he dies, then you see he would be your son-in-law, and his mother would
never like to have it said that her daughter-in-law's father had been hanged, and the thing
might be hushed up; the only difference would be that your daughter would be a widow.'

'A widow! an' then shoo could claim his donkey, an puttates, an' all his clooas, couldn't shoo?'
'Yes, certainly.'

'Well, they'll be worth summat, for he's some varry gooid clooas, an' they'd just abaat fit
me. Aw think that's th' best way to do.'

'Well if it has to be done it must be done quickly. If you will get a marriage license and
a minister, I will endeavour to restore him to consciousness, so you had better be off.'

Off went old Stooansnatch, tho' it wor nobbut four o'clock i'th' mornin.

When he'd gooan, th' doctor tell'd all 'at had happened. Bessy begged hard to have it put off
for a wick, but Joa tawk'd soa weel, an' th' doctor backed him i' all he sed, wol at last shoo
consented.

In abaat two haars, th' old man coom back, an browt th' license an' th' parson wi' him.

'Is he livin yet?' he axed in a whisper.

'Hush! yes, he still survives and is quite conscious,' an' withaat any moor to do he led' em
into th' room an' motioned th' parson to waste noa time; an' he walked up to th' bedside an'
takkin hold o' one o' each o' ther hands began his nomony, an' wor varry sooin throo wi' it,
an' pronounced 'em man an' wife.

It wor a gooid job at Stooansnatch turned his back wol it wor gooin on, for if he hadn't he
mud ha smell'd a rat, an' a big en too.

As sooin as it wor ovver th' doctor went to Joa an' axed him ha he felt.

'Aw think awm gettin on gradely thank yo; ha's mi fayther gettin on?' he sed, in a voice as
laad as if he wor hawkin his greens.

Th' parson wor soa takken wol he let his book tummel, an owd Stooansnatch jumpt ommost aght
ov his booits, an' turned raand to see if it wor possible to be Joa 'at had spokken; an when
he saw him sittin up, winking one e'e, an' a grin all ovver his face, he luk'd at him for a
minit an then he sed, 'Joa aw allus thowt thee a daycent sooart ov a lad, but aw niver gave
thi credit for havin mich wit, but tha's getten th' best on me this time. Tha's played thi
cards pratty weel for that lass, an' tha hasn't wasted mich time ovver th' gam, but tha's ommost
brokken mi heart.'

'Well, yo've ommost brokken my heead, soa we're straight.'

'Tha thinks tha's done summat clivver, but aw'll fix yo all, for aw willn't leave yo a hawpeny,
noa net a hawpeny.'

'Yo can keep all yor brass an' welcome, an' mich gooid may it do yo, aw've getten all yo had
at aw hankered after, an soa nah aw'll get up an' tak her wi' me, for shoo's mine nah, an'
aw think that old donkey an' me will be able to find her summat to ait, at any rate we'll try.'

Joa jumpt up (for he wor varry little warse for his hurt,) an' tellin Bessy to put on her duds
prepared to leeave.

'Well, Mr. Stooansnatch,' sed th' doctor, 'a weddin is better than a hangin after all, isn't it?'

'Hangin be hanged! yo've been just as deep i'th' muck as they've been i'th' mire, an' if awd
my way awd hang yo all. But aw say, luk here, aw dooant want to be made a laffin-stock on,
an soa if yo'll promise niver to mention this affair, maybe aw shall do summat for' em yet,
an' if anybody axes owt abaat it, say it wor done wi' my consent.'

They all promised, an' as they wor leeavin Joa sed, 'gooid mornin fayther, yo mun come up an'
see awr Bessy as oft as yo can, we'll mak yo welcome.'

'Joa tha'rt a scaandrel if iver ther wor one, an' thee Bess, see at tha behaves thisen, an
let' em see at tha hasn't been brought up wi' extravagant ways; save a penny wheariver tha
can, th' time may come when yo'll need it. Here's a bit o' summat to start wi',' he sed, an'
gave her an old bacca box an' shut th' door.

They all laffed, an' as they wor goin up th' street Joa oppen'd th' box, an' inside wor a little
bit o' paper, an' written on it thease words. 'For Bessy's wedding if she weds with my consent.'
They all luk'd curiously to see what wor in it as he slowly oppen'd it, an they could hardly
believe ther een when they saw a Bank o' England note for £500.

Well, yo may think ha capt Joa's mother wor when shoo saw him come in wi' Bessy on his arm,
for it wor nobbut th' neet befoor 'at he'd goan aght cooartin, an' when he saw her he sed,
'Well, mother, yo sed aw wor gooin cracked, an' sin' aw saw yo aw've been cracked an' getten
spliced, an' aw've browt yo a dowter; an' as aw've axed some friends o' mine to come to ther
drinkin, yo mun side all them tubs an' buy some rum, an' let us have some rum an' teah, an'
owt else yo can get us, for we want a gooid blowout. An' wol yo do that, Bessy an' me 'll goa
to bed a bit, for we've been up all th' neet an' awm sure shoo must be sleepy.'

'Nay awm nooan sleepy Joa, thee goa to bed an' aw'll help thi mother.'

'That's reight lass,' sed his mother, 'aw mak nowt o' fowk sleepin i'th' day time, thee help
me an' tak noa notice o' him, he isn't reight in his heead, aw cannot tell ha iver he caanselled
thee to have him.'

'Nah mother, dooant yo interfere between a man an' his wife; yo forget at aw've had my heead
smashed sin aw saw yo, an' aw want a bit o' rest.'

'Thee goa to bed an' get all th' rest tha wants, tha'll sleep better bi thisen 'coss tha'rt
moor used to it, an' aw'll see at Bessy doesn't run away.'

'But, mother, yo see'--

'Aw see nowt abaat it, an' unless tha clears aght o' this hoil ther'll nawther be rum an' teah
nor nowt else! Bless mi life lad! does ta think at ther wor niver onybody wed afoor thee? tha'rt
war nor a child wi' a new laikon.'

Joa saw it wor noa use tawkin, soa he went aght to feed his donkey, an' luk after th' pigs
an' poultry, an' mak believe he wor iver soa thrang.

At last drinkin time coom, an' a few friends coom up, an' a jolly time they had. Joa luk'd
joyous an' Bessy luk'd bonny, an' just befoor they separated for th' neet an' wor all standin
up to drink long life an' prosperity to th' newly married couple, th' door oppen'd an' in coom
owd Stooansnatch. 'Well,' he sed, 'awm just i' time,' soa seizing hold ov a glass o' rum he
says here's a toast;

   'May thease young ens to-day has seen joined,
      Find all th' pleasure ther hearts are now cravin;
   An' when spendin my brass may they find,
      As mich pleasure as aw fun i' savin.'

Ov coorse this tooast wor drunk i' bumpers, an' sooin after they brake up, an' all went to
ther hooams.

Joa an' Bessy seem to get on varry weel together; an Joa's mother says 'at all shoo wants to
mak her happy is to be a granmother.

Stooansnatch seems to be altered famously sin Bessy gate wed, an' it is sed (but for th' truth
on it aw willn't pledge misen), 'at one day he gave a little lad a penny to buy spice wi'.
If its true, he isn't past hooap yet.

He spends th' mooast ov his time up at Joa's, but he's niver had a pooaker in his hand sin
that neet, an' if yo want to see him mad, just say a word abaat hangin.

Th' New Railrooad.

Yo've heeard tell abaat th new railrooad aw dar say? It's an age o' steeam is this! Smook nuisance
and boilers brustin are ivery-day affairs, an' ivery thing an' ivery body seem to be on at
full speed. Aw wonder 'at noabdy invents a man wi a drivin pulley at his back soa's they could
speed him up as they do a loom to soa mony picks a minit; th' chap 'at get's a patent for that
ul mak a fortune.

But after all, they dooant seem in a varry gurt hurry abaat th' new railroad; but we mun remember
Rome wor'nt built in a day, nor a neet nawther, an' soa we mun have patience. They've nobbut
been agate two or three year, an' although it's hardly likely at' we shall live to see it finished,
happen somedy else will, an' that's a comfort. But bi what aw hear, ther's some fowk at Ovenden
fancy it'll be finished befoor soa varry long, an' they've started what they call "a railway
trainin class," to taich some oth' young chaps to be railway porters, soa's they'll be ready
when th' time comes. They meet in a cottage haase twice a wick to practice, an' they say they're
gettin on furst rate. Ther's owd Billy 'at wor once a firer-up for a veal pie shop, an' he's
th' president, an he's getten th' asthma soa bad wol if he sturs he puffs war nor a broken
winded horse, soa they call him puffin Billy. When they're practisin', they stand o'th' side
o'th' oven door i' ther turns, an' when Billy whistles one on 'em oppens it an' shaats aght
"Change here for Bradford Beck, Halifax, Hull and t'other shops!" then he bangs it too ageean
an shaats "All reight!" an another comes an' does th' same. When they began at th' furst they
borrowed a Tom cat o' th' old woman, an' used to put it i' th' oven for a passenger, but one
o'th' chaps wor soa fussy, 'at he bang'd th' door too befoor it had getten reight aght, an'
chopped its tail clean off. Niver mind if th' owd woman didn't mak a crack--shoo declared shoo'd
sue' em for condemnation. Billy tell'd her it ud be a Manx cat after that, but shoo sooin tell'd
him shoo wanted nooan sich lik manx; soa they have to tak ther lessons nah withaat passenger.
Two on 'em 'at's passed ther examination are studdyin nah for ticket collectors, an' they promise
to mak varry gooid uns. When they practise that, they call th' haase door th' furst class,
th' cubbord th' second class, an' th' oven door th' third class, an' they start at th' haase
door furst, "Gentlemen, your tickets please," then they goa to th' cubbord door, "Tickets,"
an' then to th' oven door, "Nah then, luk sharp wi' them tickets."

But they'd a sad mishap one neet, for it seems th' owd woman had been bakin, and shoo forgate
to mention it, soa when th' furst chap gate hold o' th' oven door hannel he burn'd his fingers,
an' becos tother students lafft he sed they'd done it o' purpose; an' it led to a reglar fratch,
an' he gate into sich a rage 'at he sed he'd swallow one on em, if he did'nt hold his din,
an' it wod'nt be th' furst porter he'd swallow'd nawther! Soa th' taicher tell'd him 'at sich
like carryin on wor varry unporterish, an' if he brake th' rules that way he'd have to be taken
before th' inspector. But nowt could quieten him till he gate his fingers rubb'd wi sooap an'
they gave ovver smartin, soa as th' oven door wor hot they had to practice another pairt. One
on 'em borrowed a wheelbarrow, as they could'nt get a luggage lurry, an' they had to wheel
it up an' daan th' haase floor i' ther turns, callin aght "By leave!" An' them 'at could manage
to run ovver one o' th' tother's tooas, an' goa on as if nowt wor, gate one gooid mark, but
him at could run buzz agean a chap an' fell him wor th' next on th' list for a guard. It used
to be warm wark boath for him at wor wheelin' an' for tothers, but they wor all on 'em bent
o' bein' porters, soa they tew'd at it, detarmined to maister all th' ins an' aghts abaat it.
Whether all ther trouble will be thrown away or net aw connot tell, but ther's one gooid thing,
it keeps' em aght ov a war turn an' saves th' police a deal o' bother.

But th' owd fowk dooant like th' idea; they see noa use i' bringin sich gurt stinkin things
into their district, an' they've detarmined to do all they con to stop it; when a body's been
able to live 60 or 70 year withaat sich like nonsense, they see noa reason why they shouldn't
be let finish their bit o' time aght quietly.

Mose Hart's Twelvth Mess.

'Holloa! whear ta for, Dick? Tha'rt donned up fearful grand.'

'Nay, aw nobbut wish aw knew whear aw wor, but aw connot tell for th' life on me; but tha can
happen put me into th' end, for awm seekin "Th' Fiddle Brig an' Blow Pipe Music Saloon," for
aw've getten two tickets for a grand consart 'at's gooin to be gien bi some Morpheus Musical
Society, an' aw've rammel'd abaat for a gooid clock haar, an' awm blow'd if aw can find th' shop.'

'Why, if tha's getten two tickets tha mud as weel gie me one, an' aw'll goa hooam an' get donned,
an' we'st be company.'

'Bith' heart, lad, aw wish tha wod; aw dooant care bein my share towards a quairt if tha'll
goa, but awm feeard we'st be lat; doesn't ta think them clooas tha has on'll do?'

'Nay, tha sees mi britches knee is brussen.'

'Ne'er heed, aw'l leearn thi mi kerchy, an' then as sooin as tha's getten set daan tha can
spreead it ovver thi knees, an' nobdy'll iver know owt abaat it.'

'Well, if tha doesn't mind aw dooant, for a chap had better have a hoil in his clooas nor a
hoil in his karracter, soa let's try to find this place. Sithee! what does that sign say 'at's
hingin' aght o' th' charmer winder?'

'Nay, Seth, tha knows awm noa reader, an' besides aw havn't mi specks, but what does ta mak
it into?'

'Well, ther's a Hess, an' a Hay, an' a Hell, an' two Hoes, an' a Hen, what does that spell?'

'Nay, aw connot tell, but it'll nooan be what we want awm sewer o' that, for thear's noa hens
abaat thear.'

'Ha hens, lumpheead! It's th' letter N aw sed.'

'Litter hen! why aw nivver heeard o' sich o' thing; aw've heeard o' pigs havin litters but
nivver hens, we call 'em cletches.'

'Tha gets less sense, Dick, ivvery day, aw do think. Doesn't ta understand? Ther's a Hess,
an' a Hay, an' a Hell, an' two Hoes, an' a Hen, an' that spells saloon, or else aw've forgetten
my algibra.'

'Well, well, happen it does; tha's noa need to get soa cross-grained abaat it; if tha goes
on like that aw'll gie th' ticket to somdy else, nah mark that.'

'Tha can gie it to who the duce tha's a mind, Dick; awm nawther beholden to thee nor to thi
ticket, soa crack that nut!'

'Well, tha's noa need to be soa chuff. Here's th' ticket an' mi kerchy, an' nah tha con follow
clois to me an' we'll goa up stairs. Aw con hear some mewsic bi nah, come on.'

Just as they oppened th' door all th' singers wor standin up to begin.

'Dooant stand up for th' sake o' us,' sed Dick, 'get on wi' yer mewsic, we can caar daan onywhear.'
Iverybody laff'd when Dick sed soa, an' as they didn't know what they wor laffin at they thowt
it wor at Seth's britches.

'Yo've noa need to laff,' sed Seth, 'aw've some better at hooam.'

'Silence! silence!' bawled aght a lot o' fowk; an' when all wor quiet, th' chap at th' far
end began shakkin a bit ov a stick 'at he had, an' Seth sed, 'Tha's noa need to shak thi stick
at me,' but what he sed beside wor lost, for all th' singers struck up, an' Dick an' Seth set
daan o' th' edge ov a big drum 'at ther wor in th' nook. In a bit Seth axed th' chap 'at set
next to him what they wor singin.

'It's Mozart's Twelfth Mass,' he sed.

'Why, what dooant they turn him aght for?'

'Turn who aght?' sed th' chap lukkin raand.

'Why, Mose Hart. If he worked at awr shop he'd be secked for one mess, niver tawk abaat twelve.'

'Whisht!' sed th' chap, an' gave Seth a drive wi' his elbow just between his brace buttons,
an' Seth went daan wi' a soss onto th' drum end, an' throo it he went wi' a crack as laad as
a pistol gooin off.

'Thear, tha's done it,' sed Dick; 'Tha's letten all th' mewsic aght o' that, onyway; they owt
to ha made a drum major o' thee.'

'It's noa fawt o' mine,' he sed, as he tried to scramel aght. 'Let me catch hold o' that chap'
at knocked th' wind aght o' me, an' if aw dooant drum him it'll be becoss aw connot.'

When he gate to his feet he luk'd raand, but th' chap had mizel'd, but all th' singers wor
standin raand laffin fit to split.

'Are yo laffin becoss mi britches knees is brussen or becose th' drum end's brussen, aw'd like
to know?'

'What's th' matter wi' thi? tha'rt as mad as if tha'd swoller'd th' drum asteead o'th' drum
swollerin thee; tha mud ha getten thi bally brussen,' sed Dick.

'It's very plain to me that there will be no more harmony here this ev'ning,' sed th' little
man 'at wor shakkin th' stick, 'and so I shall leave you, an' I hope those who have tickets
to dispose of, will in future give them to persons who can appreciate music.'

'Aw'll mak thee sick for two pins,' sed Seth, 'if tha says owt agean me, aw'll sing thee for
glasses raand ony day.'

The conductor sed no more but went home.

'Who is yond leckterin fooil?' sed Seth, to a chap 'at stood near.

'That's th' conductor.'

'Corn doctor, is he? Why, what does he want at a singing doo? Connot yo cut yor own corns?'

'Tha doesn't understand, he's th' leeader.'

'Well, if he's th' leeader, what dooant yo follow him for? But nah luk here! aw'll tell yo
what aw'll do. Aw've been th' cause o' braikin up yor spree, soa suppoas yo all stop an' have
a bit ov a doo wi' me; aw've getten a shillin or two an' we'll send for some ale an' mak a
reglar free-an-easy on it.'

'Hear! hear!' sed one.

'Ov course we'll have it here, whear else does ta want it!' Soa they all agreed to sit daan,
and Seth sent for two gallon o' ale an' some bacca, an' nooan on 'em seemed to be sooary 'at
things had turned aght as they had.

When they'd all had a second tot, an' getten ther pipes let, they made Seth into th' cheerman,
an' he sed they'd have to excuse him for net knowin ther names, but when he wanted to call
anybody up he'd do his best to mak 'em understand who he meant, an' to begin wi, he should
mak bould to ax that chap wi' th' big nooas to sing a song.

Nubdy stirred, soa Seth pointed him aght an' sed, 'Will that chap wi' th' red peg i'th' middle
ov his face oblige the company with a song?'

Th' chap couldn't mistak who wor meant this time, so he gate up.

'Mister cheerman,' he sed, 'aw doant know 'at my nooas owes yo or onybody else owt, an' why
it should be remarked aw can't tell.'

'Aw should think it owes thee a gooid deal,' sed th' cheerman. 'If tha doesn't want it to be
remarked tha shouldn't paint it sich a bright colour; but get on wi' th' singing.'

'Awm noa singer, aw play a offerclyde, but awm thinkin' o' changin, an' leearnin th' fiddle.'

'That's reight, lad, do. Awm sure it'll tak all th' wind tha has to blow that peg o' thine
i' cold weather; a fiddle 'll suit thee better, an' tha'll niver be fast for a spot to hing
up thi stick. But it's a song we want, an' not a speech, an' if tha doesn't sing tha'll be
fined a quairt.'

That settled it; soa, clearin his voice, he began--

      Tho' the sober shake the head,
      And drink water, boys, instead,
   And the foolish all strong liquors do decry;
      Yet the foaming glass for me,
      May we never, never see
   A friend without a draught when dry.

   Then quaff, boys, quaff, and let's be merry;
   Why should dull care be crowned a king?
   Let us have another drain, till the night begins to wane,
   And the bonny, bonny morn peeps in.

      Let us drown each selfish soul
      Deep in the flowing bowl;
   Let the rosy god of wine take the throne;
      And he who cannot boast
      Some good humour in his toast,
   Let him wander in the world alone.
                Then quaff, boys, &c.

      O, I love a jolly face,
      And I love a pretty lass,
   And I love to see the young and old around;
      Then with frolic and with fun
      Let both wine and moments run,
   And the hearty, hearty laugh resound.
                Then quaff, boys, &c.

      When man was placed on earth
      He was naked at his birth,
   But God a robe of reason round him threw;
      First he learned to blow his nose,
      Then he learned to make his clothes,
   And then he learned to bake and brew.
                Then, quaff, boys, &c.

      If it's wrong to press the vine--
      Thus to make the rosy wine,
   Then it must be wrong to crush the wheaten grain;
      But we'll laugh such things to scorn,
      And although it's coming morn,
   Just join me in another drain.
                Then quaff, boys, &c.

'E'e gow, lad! that's a rare song. Aw'll say nowt noa moor abaat thy nooas after that, but
tha munnot sing that amang teetotallers. It's thy call nah, let's keep it movin, call for who
or what tha likes.'

'Well, if awm to call, aw shall call th' landlord to fill this pitcher, for this pipe o' mine's
varry dry.'

'All reight, lad, order it to be filled, aw'll pay for it, an wol they're fotchin it call o'
somdy for a song or summat.'

'Well, aw call o'th' cheerman for a song.'

'Nay, lad, tha munnot call o' me, for if awd to start ony mak ov mewsic aw should niver get
throo it.'

'Yo went throo th' drum easy enuff,' said one.

'Eea, an' he brag'd he could sing better ner awr conductor,' sed another.

'Them's just my sentiment,' sed one o'th' singers, 'an' aw dooant care who hears me say it,
for aw dooant care whether a chap's coit is aght o'th' elbows or his britches knees brussen,
noa matter if he's----'

'Thee shut up,' sed Seth, 'it's my call next, an' aw want thee to know, owd fiddle-face, 'at
tha can give ovver talking abaat fowks clooas, an' sing as sooin an tha likes.'

'Mr. Cheerman, aw nobbut know one, but as sooin as aw've supt aw'll start, shove th' ale this
rooad.'

'Get supt then, it taks more bother to start thee singin nor what it taks to start th' Dyke Engin.'

   All kinds of songs I've heard folks sing,
      Of things in every nation;
   Of Queen's Road swells, and Clarehall belles,
      And every new sensation.
   But I've a song you never heard,
      Although the music's ancient;
   It's all about one Doctor Bird,
      And his fascinating patient.
         So list to me
         And I'll tell you all the story of this Doctor B.

   One day he sat within his room,
      By draughts and pills surrounded;
   Strange pictures hanging on the walls
      Which timid folks confounded.
   He heard the bell, and strange to tell,
      He quickly changed his manner,
   And in there came his bosom's flame
      His darling Mary Hannah.
         So list to me, &c.

   'Sweet Mary Hannah!' 'Doctor dear'--
      Such was their salutation;
   'I've come,' sed she, 'for much I fear,
      I've got the palpitation.'
   'O never mind,' says Doctor B.,
      'You need not long endure it;
   Just come a little nearer me,
      I fancy I can cure it.'
         But list to me, &c.

   He took a loving, long embrace,
      Cries she, 'Oh, dear, that's shocking!'
   When the doctor's boy, to mar their joy,
      Just entered without knocking.
   And when he saw the state o' things,
      Then down the stairs he hurried,
   And ran to tell the Doctor's wife,--
      For Doctor B. was married.
         So list to me, &c.

   The Doctor seized his hat and cane,
      And cried, 'Dear Mary, hook it!'
   Then down he ran, and found a cab,
      And in an instant took it--
   'Drive for your life and fetch my wife,
      And need no second telling!'
   And in a very little time
      They reached the Doctor's dwelling.
         So list to me, &c.

   His wife was there, said he, 'My dear
      Come with me to the city,
   I'm lonely when you are not near,'
      Says she, 'Why that's a pity.'
   He took her to the self same room,
      And in the self same manner;
   He kissed and coaxed his lawful wife,
      As he'd just kissed Mary Hannah.
         So list to me, &c.

   In loving talk some time they spent,
      Says she, 'now I'll go shopping;'
   He kissed her and as out she went,
      The Doctor's boy came hopping;
   He saw her and he quickly cried,
      'O, please excuse me missus,
   But Doctor's got a girl inside,
      And he's smothering her with kisses.
         So list to me, &c.

   'You little sneaking cur,' she cried,
      'That shows that you've been peeping.'
   She boxed his ears from side to side
      And quickly sent him weeping.
   The Doctor rubbed his hands and smiled,
      To think how well he'd plan'd it,
   And Mrs. B.'s quite reconciled,
      But the boy don't understand it.
         So you all see
         What a very cunning fellow was this Doctor B.

   Now all you married men so gay,
      Just listen to my moral;
   Indulge your wives in every way,
      And thus avoid a quarrel.
   Pray do your best to settle down,
      Nor with the fair ones frisk it;
   You might not fare like Doctor B.,
      It isn't safe to risk it.
         For you can see
         How very near in trouble was this Doctor B.

'Is that th' only song tha knows young man?'

'That's all aw know, Mr. Cheerman.'

'Why, tak my advice an' forget it as sooin as tha can, for aw niver heeard a war, an' see if
tha cannot find a better. Nah tha can call for th' next.'

'Well, aw'll call o' owd Miles, an' if he con do ony better aw'll pay for th' next gallon.'

Old Miles stood up, an' crossed his hands i' front an turned up his een as if he wor gooin
to relate his experience at a prayer-meetin, an' began:

   They may talk of pure love but its fleeting at best;
      Let them ridicule gold if they will;
   But money's the thing that has long stood the test,
      And is longed for and sought after still.
   Love must kick the balance against a full purse,
      And you'll find if you live to four score,
   That whativer your troubles the heaviest curse,
      Is to drag on your life and be poor.

   If you sigh after titles and long for high rank,
      Let this be your aim night and day,
   To increase the small balance you have at your bank,
      And to honors' 't will soon point the way.
   For you'll find that men bow to the glittering dross,
      Whate'er its possessor may be;
   And if obstacles rise they will help you across,
      If you only can boast £. s. d.

   See that poor man in rags, bending under his load,
      He passes unnoticed along:
   No one lends him a hand as he goes on his road,
      He must toil as he can through the throng.
   But if he was wealthy, how many would fly
      To assist him and offer the hand;
   But he's poor, so they leave him to toil or to die,
      That's the rule in this Christian land.

'Nah, that's summat like a song; aw could lizzen to that all th' neet, an' aw think yo'll all
agree 'at owd fiddle face has lost his gallon. Nah, lad, does ta hear? Tak to payin.'

But he didn't hear, for he'd quietly slipped away an' left 'em wi' a empty pitcher. 'Well,
he's a mean owd stick, onyway; but aw'll pay for it fillin once moor. An' nah, Miles, it's
yor turn to call.'

'Mr. Cheerman, aw'll call o' yor friend for th' next.'

'A'a, lad,' sed Dick, 'tha should pass by me, for aw niver sang a song i' mi life, an' awm
to old to start, but if yo've noa objections aw'll give yo a recitation.'

'Gooid lad, Dick, goa on! Tha'rt gam, aw know.'

   Ov all th' enjoyments' at sweeten man's life,
   Ther's nooan can come up to a sweet tempered wife;
   An' he must be lonesome, an' have little pleasure,
   'At doesn't possess sich a woman to treasure.
   But them 'at expect when they tak hooam a bride,
   'At nowt nobbut sunshine wi' them will abide,
   An' think 'at noa sorrow will iver oppress,
   They'll find ther mistak aght, yo'll easily guess.
   For th' mooast fascinatin an' lovable elves,
   Are all on 'em mortal, just th' same as ussels,
   An' show tempers 'at sometimes are net ovver pleasant,
   They find fault whear ther's room, an' sometimes whear ther isn't,
   An' to get there own way, why they'll kiss, coax, or cavil,
   They'll smile like an angel, or storm like the devil.
   But aw've monny times sed, an' aw say it ageean,
   'At women are ofter i'th' reight nor are th' men,
   Just fancy gooin hooam to a bachelor's bed,
   All shudderin an' shakkin yo lig daan yor heead.
   There's a summat a wantin, 'at fills yo wi' fear,
   Yo can turn as yo like, but you find it's not thear,
   An' yo freeat an' yo fitter, or weep like a willow;
   An' for want o' owt better, mak love to a pillow.
   But him 'at's been blessed wi' a wife he can love,
   Liggs his heead on her breast pure as snow from above,
   An' ther's nubdy could buy it for silver or gold,
   An' he wodn't exchange it for Abrahams of old.
   An' he falls hard asleep, wi' her arm raand his neck,
   An' gets up lik a lark, an' then works like a brick.

'Nah, friends, aw wish to say a few words befoor aw goa. Awm varry sorry 'at aw brack that
drum, but yo see it wor an accident, an' aw've done my best to mak it up, an' as Dick's recitation
maks me think awd better be gettin hooam, or aw shall happen find it varry warm when aw get
thear. Aw'll nobbut call o' one moor befoor sayin gooid neet, an' that's Mose Hart. If he's
hear aw should like him to try agean; ther's nowt like perseverance, an' if a chap fails twelve
times th' thirteenth may pay for all.'

'Mr. Cheerman, Mozart wor deead long befoor yo wor born or thowt on.'

'Then that chap 'at dug his elbow into my guts tell'd me a lie, for he sed he'd just made a
mess for th' twelfth time when aw come in.'

Ther wor a crack o' laffin when he sed that, for th' chaps saw his mistak, an' soa one on 'em
went quietly up to him an' explained it. 'O, then,' he sed, 'if he's deead we may as weel goa
hooam, an' all aw've getten to say is 'at ony time yo chonce to come by awr haase, just luk
in an' aw'll mak yo welcome, an' my owd lass'll mak yo a mess o' some sooart 'at'll do yo some
gooid. Yo'll find it easy, for aw live th' next door to th' Pig an' Whistle, an' soa aw wish
yo all a varry gooid neet--Come on Dick.'

Th' Hoil-i'th'-Hill Statty.

CHAPTER I.

Th' Hoil-i'th'-Hill Fowld wor a quiet little place; ther wor sixteen haases altogether, four
on each side ov a big square yard, an' a pump i'th' middle. Th' fowk 'at lived thear had mooast
on 'em been born thear, an' ther'd been soa monny weddin's amang 'em wol they wor all summat
moor or less akin. Niver i'th' memory o'th' oldest on 'em had ther been ony change i'th' fowld,
except nah an' then a bit o' fresh paint wor put on th' doors an' winders, until one day th'
landlord coom and browt two or three smart lukkin chaps' at begun to messure hear an' thear,
an' all th' wimmen an' th' childer watched' em wi' as mich anxiety as if they wor gooin to
pool all th' haases daan.

Th' chaps wor all off at ther wark, but when they coom hooam at neet they wor sooin made acquainted
wi' all 'at had gooan on, an' when they'd getten ther drinkins, one after another walked aght,
wol they wor all met together raand th' pump.

'What does ta mak on it, Jacob?' sed one o'th' younger end, spaikin to an owd man wi' a grey
heead. 'What does ta think they meean to do?'

'Nay aw connot tell, unless it's some o' them wrang-heeaded fowk 'at th' maister wor tawkin
abaat, 'at want to start a schooil booard or some new-fangled noation.'

'Why, what mak o' schooils is them schooil board consarns?'

'Aw dooant know, nobbut it's a schooil whear yo send childer to leearn ther letters, an' they
booard 'em at same time.'

'Why, that's nooan a bad thing if they give 'em owt daycent to ait.'

'Does ta think they'll have owt at we shalln't have to pay for? Did ta iver know th' Corporation
give owt for nowt? All aw wish is 'at they'd let us alooan. We've getten on here for aboon
fifty year withaat ony o' ther bother, an' aw could like to finish my bit o' time aght as we are.'

They all agreed wi' this, an th' wimmen 'at had gethered raand to harken sed they thowt soa
too, an' it ud seem 'em better if they'd luk after ther own wives an' childer a bit moor, and
net come botherin thear.

When th' bacca wor done, they went back into ther haases, one bi one, an' went to bed, but
ther wor a sooart ov a claad hung ovver 'em all, and they didn't sleep varry weel.

Next mornin, as they started off for th' day, they each gave a luk raand, as if to fix iverything
i' ther mind, for fear when they coom back they'd niver be able to own th' spot.

Sooin after they'd gooan, a lot o' navvies coom an' started o' diggin. Wor'nt th' wimmin aght
in a crack! 'What are yo baan to do?' they sed.

'We're gooin to put yo all watter in,' sed th' gaffer, 'soas yo can do withaat this pump.'

'We dooant want ony watter puttin in; when we want watter we can fotch it,--goa abaat yor business!'

But he tell'd 'em they'd getten orders to do it, an th' landlord had agreed, soa they went
on wi ther wark.

Nah, th' chap 'at had takken this job to do, hadn't takken it bi th' day; he'd agreed to do
it for soa mich, soa yo may bet he kept' em all at it, an' it tuk varry little time to dig
an' get th' pipes laid; an' then th' plumbers wor waitin to start, an' iverybody wor as thrang
as if ther lives depended on it bein finished that day,--an' it wor finished,--an' as sooin
as it wor done they set to wark an' pool'd daan th' owd pump, an' laid some flags ovver th'
well, an' went hooam.

Th' wimmin didn't know whether to be pleased wi' th' new taps or mad abaat th' loss o'th' pump,
an' soa they sed nowt until ther fellies coom back. It worn't monny minits afoor they began
to coom hooam, an' as sooin as they saw th' pump ligged o'th' graand an' th' well covered up,
they luk'd like--weel, it's noa use me tryin to tell what they luk'd like, for they luk'd so
monny different ways 'at aw should be fast amang it; but ther worn't one on 'em suited, an'
net one 'em had patience to luk at th' new taps.

Owd Jacob spit his teah aght ov his maath as sooin as he tasted it. 'Aw knew ha it ud be,'
he sed, 'if iver we lost that pump.'

'Why, what's th' matter?' sed his dowter.

'Matter! connot ta taste th' difference between that watter an' th' watter tha used to get
aght o'th' pump?'

'Why, father,' shoo sed, 'that is pump watter, for aw pump'd it mysen befoor they pool'd it daan.'

'Oh, did ta. It wor happen a bit o' bacca aw had i' mi maath. But allus bear this i' mind,
if iver tha gets wed an' should leave this fowld niver go to live whear ther isn't a pump.'

After th' drinkin all th' chaps could be seen standin i'th' door hoils, leeanin agean th' jawm,
for they felt lost, an' didn't know whear to goa. They'd allus been i'th' habit o' getherin
raand th' owd pump, an' it seemed nah as if they couldn't tell whear to stand for th' pump
had acted as cheerman for' em when they had ther argyfyin meetins,--an' a varry gooid cheerman too.

At last one on 'em screwed up courage to goa an' luk at th' owd pump case as it ligged i'th'
muk, an' then one an' another joined him, wol it luk'd for all th' world as if they wor holdin
an inquest.

'That's been a gooid friend to us all,' sed Jacob, 'an' aw dooant like to see it liggin thear.'

'Noa, moor do aw,' sed another, 'an' it luks a sooart o' desolate, sin they tuk th' guts aght.'

'Aw wish somdy'd tak their guts aght,' sed Levi, 'it ud sarve 'em reight. But what mun we do
wi' it! Th' fowld luks lost withaat it. Suppooas we put it up agean just to luk at?'

'Aw propooas we bury it,' sed Jacob, 'an' then raise a monement ovver it. It desarves one better
nor lots 'at get 'em. It wor allus sober, an' minded its own business, an' niver refused to
give owt it had if yo shook it bi th' hand.'

'Well, but whear mun we bury it?' sed Jonas.

'Aw think,' sed Jacob, ''at as it's had a wattery life, it owt to have a wattery grave. Let's
pool them flags up an' drop it into th' well.'

They all agreed to this, soa it worn't monny minits befoor they had th' well oppened, an' wor
ready to drop it in, but one o'th' women happened to ax 'who wor gooin to read ovver it.' Nah
this had n ver struck nooan on' em befoor, an' they saw at once 'at it should be attended to.

'Whear's Elkanah?' sed Jacob. 'He's allus ready wi' a speech, let's see what he can find to
say.' Soa one on 'em whistled, an' Elkanah coom, an' they tell'd him what they wanted.

'All reight,' he sed, 'but if yor baan to bury it like that aw think ther owt to be a burryin
drinkin.'

'That's reight, Kana!' shaated th' wimmin, 'let's have it reight if we have it at all.'

'That's my noation,' sed Elkanah, 'an aw'll see what aw con collect befoor we bury it,--aw'll
be a shillin.'

'Soa will aw,' 'soa will aw,' 'aw'll be another,' an ther wor sooin thirteen shillin an' sixpence
sam'd up. 'Nah, awm ready,' he sed, 'tak off yor hats, an' handle it gently for its rayther
rotten.' They all did as they wor tell'd, an' havin getten ready Elkanah spake,--

   'Into this well soa deep,
   We put thee daan to sleep,
      Farewell owd pump.
   Tho' some may thee despise,
   We know tha'rt sure to rise
      Up wi' a jump.
   'Tha's sarved thi purpose weel,
   An' all thi neighbors feel
      Sad at thi fate.
   But as tha's had thi day,
   This is all we've to say,
      Ger aght o'th' gate.'

After this one on 'em struck up a temperance hymn, an' bi th' time they'd getten through an'
th' owd pump wor sent to its restin place two o'th' wimmen wor ready wi' a gallon o' rum an'
ale mixed, an' they totted it aght i' pint pots. This didn't go far amang th' lot, soa they
fotched another an another wol ther brass wor done, an' then separated wi' heavy hearts an'
rayther leet heeads an' went to bed, feelin glad to know 'at they'd done all they could towards
payin a fittin tribute to an owd friend.

CHAPTER II.

Next day wor a gloomy day i'th' Hoil-i'th'-Fowld; whether it wor grief for th' loss o'th' pump,
or th' effects o'th' rum an' ale, aw connot say, but all th' chaps stopt at hooam, an' it wor
ommost dinner time when they mustered i'th' middle o'th' yard, an' owd Jacob, who'd been puffin
at a empty pipe for a long time, luk'd up an' spake.

'Lads,' he sed, 'it seems to me 'at this yard will niver luk like itsen agean, unless we have
summat standin up i'th' middle i'th' place ov th' owd pump; an' aw've been tryin to think what
it had better be, but aw can't mak up mi mind abaat it. What do yo think?'

'Suppooas we put a tombstun ovver th' pump,' sed Elkanah.

'Tha wants th' job o' writin th' hepitaf, does ta?' sed Jonas.

'Well, aw dooant think that ud do, for a tombstun is nobbut a varry gloomy sooart ov a thing
at th' best hand. Nah, what do you say if we have a statty? Aw think a statty ud look noble
an' inspirin like.'

'Eea, aw think soa too,' sed Simeon, 'but who mun we have a statty on? Mun it be th' landlord?'

'Landlord be blow'd! What mun we have a statty o' him for? We see enuff o' him ivery month
when he comes for his rent.'

'Well, who mun it be?'

'Aw dooant know 'at it matters mich who it is, for they put up stattys to onybody nah days,
nobbut we mun pick aght somdy 'at gets a daycent wage, 'coss he'll have to find pairt o'th'
brass. Nah, ther's Kana thear; he isn't baat a two or three paand. Suppooas we put one up to Kana?'

'Why, what's Kana iver done 'at he should have a statty?'

'What difference does that mak? Just opposite, at the junction of Broadway and Fifth avenue, is
a handsome granite obelisk, with appropriate ornaments in bronze, erected to the memory of General
W. J. Worth. Immediately beyond this is the Worth House, fronting
on Broadway and Fifth avenue.

The vicinity of Madison Square is the brightest, prettiest, and liveliest
portion of the great city.

At the southwest corner of Twenty-sixth street is the St. James' Hotel, also of white marble,
and just opposite is the "Stevens' House," an immense building constructed
on the French plan of "flats," and rented in suites of apartments.

Between Twenty-seventh and Twenty-eighth streets, on the west side, is the Coleman House. At the
southeast corner of Twenty-ninth street is the Sturtevant House.

 May be 'as th' Corporation's
taen away th' pump they may want to shift th' statty.'

'Corporation be hanged! we'll put it up thear an' let them mell on it 'at dar.'

'Well' sed Simeon, 'aw'll start it reight away, but aw'st want Kana to sit aside o'th' lathe
wol awm turnin, or else awst niver be able to get a likeness on him.'

'Oh, th' likeness matters nowt; tha can paint his name on it an' then iverybody'll know whose
it is.'

'After a bit moor tawk they sauntered off, some one way an' some another, an' amused thersens
as weel as they could wol bed time, an' then went to sleep, all except Simeon; he could'nt
sleep, for he didn't like to admit 'at he couldn't turn a statty, an' still he didn't know
ha to start; but he wor bent o' having th' thirty shillin ony way.

Next mornin he made a beginnin, an' he thowt he'd turn th' body pairt first, an' he made a
varry daycent job on it he thowt, an' when they ax'd him at neet ha he wor gettin on, he tell'd
'em th' belly piece wor all reight, an' he'd have it all done bi Setterdy neet; an' he kept
his word, an' when they all coom hooam thear it wor, wi' a gurt bedquilt ovver it, waitin to
be unveiled, an' yo con bet it worn't long befoor they'd all swallow'd ther drinkin an' wor
waitin--all except Kana, he felt a sooart o' modest abaat it an' had to be fotched aght.

Jacob wor th' cheerman, an' they maanted him on a peggytub turned upside daan; but he wor a
sooart o' fast what to say, soa he ax'd Simeon. 'Why,' he sed, tha mun praise th' statty, an'
say it's a life-like portrait, an' then tha mun tell all th' gooid things tha knows abaat Kana.'

'Why, but aw dooant know nowt varry gooid abaat him, nobbut he can cure a bit o' bacon dacently.'

'Niver heed, tha mun say all tha thinks he owt to ha done, it'll do just as weel.'

Kana wor wonderin all th' time what he'd have to say, soa he called Jonas o' one side an' axed him.

'Oh, thy pairt's easy enuff. Tha mun thank 'em all, an' say it's th' praadest day o' thi life;
but dooant say owt abaat thi own ten shillin, coss it willn't do for iverybody to know that;
an' then as tha's nowt to booast on thisen, put in a word or two abaat thi father. Owt tha
says obaat thi father is sure to goa daan.'

'Order! order!' shaated two or three as Jacob gate ready to spaik. 'Feller citizens, an' citizenesses,
under this bed quilt is a statty erected to th' memory of Kana, an' it's put here asteead o'th'
pump. You all know Kana. He's a daycent sooart ov a chap, an' we thowt he owt to have a statty.
At onyrate, we wanted a statty, an' it mud as weel be Kana's as onybody's else. He's a varry
daycent chap, as aw sed befoor, an' upright--varry upright--as upright--as upright as a yard
o' pump watter. An' aw've noa daat he's honest; aw niver knew him trusted wi' owt, but varry
likely if he wor he'd stick to it. He's a gentleman, th' bit ther is on him, an' he allus pays
his rent. Aw could say a gooid deeal moor, but th' least sed is th' sooinest mended, an' as
yo all want to see what's under this quilt, aw'll say no moor but show yo at once.'

Off coom th' quilt, an' ther wor th' statty, but it didn't stand on its feet, for it wor raised
on a powl, an' turned raand like a weathercock. Worn't ther a shaat when they saw it! Didn't
they swing ther hats raand! Niver mind!

'Well,' sed Jacob, 'tha's made a gooid job o' that, Simeon; it's as nice a bit o' wood as aw've
seen for a long time, but what made thi have it to turn raand?'

'Eea, it's a bit o' nice wood, an' them buttons 'at aw put in for his een cost me sixpence
a-piece. Aw thowt it wor noa use puttin a nooas on, for tha sees it ud be sure to get brokken
off, an' th' reason aw made it to turn raand is becoss aw thowt it wor hardly fair 'at fowk
'at live o' one side o' th' fowld should have his face to luk at allus, an' tother side his
back; soa nah we con have it lukkin one way one day an' another th' next. But whisht! Kana's
baan to spaik.'

'Kind friends, aw just stand up to spaik a few words hopin to find yo all weel as aw am at
present. If onybody had tell'd my fayther 'at his son wod iver have a statty like that, aw
think it wod ha brokken his heart. This is a praad day for me, an' aw shall niver see this
work o' art withaat thinkin abaat what it cost. My father wor a gooid man, an' awm his son,
an' this is my statty, an' aw thank yo one an' all, soa noa moor at present, throo yours truly,
Elkanah.'

When he'd done ther wor some moor shaatin, an' then one o'th' wimmen sed shoo'd a word or two
to say. 

So he tried to drown his new-born pity in wine.

At a late hour of the day, Alfred and his attendants arrived, bringing
news of the coming succour to Father Cuthbert and the other friends
who awaited him with much anxiety.

They had contrived to account for his absence to the lady Edith,
from whom they thought it necessary to hide the true state of affairs.

But everything tended to increase Alfred's feverish anxiety about his brother. The relieving
force could not arrive for hours; meanwhile he knew not what to do.

No tidings were heard: Father Swithin had failed and Elfric might
perhaps even now be dead.

So Alfred, taking counsel only of his own brave, loving heart, left
the priory in the dusk, attended by the faithful Oswy, and walked
towards his former home.

The night was dark and cloudy, the moon had not yet arisen, and they were close upon the hall ere
they saw its form looming though the darkness.

Neither spoke, but they paused before the drawbridge and listened.

Sounds of uproarious mirth arose from within; Danish war songs, shouting
and cheering; the whole body of the invaders were evidently feasting
and revelling with that excess, of which in their leisure moments
they were so capable.

"It is well!" said Alfred; and they walked round the exterior of the moat, marking the brightly
lighted hall and the unguarded look of the place; yet not wholly unguarded, for they saw the figure
of a man outlined against a bright patch of sky, pacing the leaded roof, evidently on guard.

And now they had reached that portion of their circuit which led them opposite the chamber window
of the lamented Ella, and Alfred gazed sadly upon it, when both he and Oswy started as they heard
cries and moans, and sometimes articulate words, proceeding therefrom.

They listened eagerly, and caught the name "Dunstan," as if uttered in vehement fear, then the
cry. "Water! I burn!" and cry after cry, as if from one in delirium.

"It is Elfric! it is Elfric!" said Alfred.

"It is my young lord's voice," said the thrall; "he is in a fever from his wound."

"What can we do?" and Alfred walked impatiently to and fro; at last he stopped.

"Oswy! if it costs me my life I will enter the castle!"

"It shall cost my life too, then. I will live and die with my lord!"

"Come here, Oswy; they do not know the little postern door hidden behind those bushes; the passage
leads up to the chapel, and to the gallery leading to my father's chamber, where Elfric lies
dying. I remember that that door was left unlocked, and perhaps I
can save him.

They are all feasting like hogs; they will not know, and if Ragnar
meet me, why, he or I must die;" and he put his hand convulsively
upon the sword which was dependent from his girdle.

"Lead on, my lord; you will find your thrall ready to live or die with you!" said Oswy.

At the extreme angle of the building there was a large quantity of
holly bushes which grew out of the soil between the moat and the wall,
which itself was clothed with the thickest ivy; the roof above was
slanting-- an ordinary timber roof covering the chapel--so that no
sentinel could be overhead. Standing on the further side of the moat,
all this and no more could be observed.

The first difficulty was
how to cross the moat in the absence of either bridge or boat. It
was true they might swim over; but in the event of their succeeding
in the rescue of Elfric, how were they to bear him back? The difficulty
had to be overcome, and they reflected a moment.

"There is a small
boat down at the ferry," whispered Oswy.

It was all Alfred needed,
and he and Oswy at once started for the river. They returned in a
few minutes, bearing a light boat, almost like a British coracle,
on which they instantly embarked, and a push or two with the pole
sent them noiselessly across the moat. But if he hadn't a varry heigh opinion o' th' fowk he met, yet he worn't withaat pity
for 'em, an' he generally ended up wi' sayin 'at it wor hardly reight to blame 'em for bein
short o' wit when they'd had no orderation on it. But tho' he wor varry liberal wi' his advice,
ther wor nubdy could charge him wi' bein too liberal wi' his brass, for he'd pairt wi' nowt
if he could help it; yet he'd one waikness in his disposition, an' that wor 'at he couldn't
say 'Noa' if onybody offered to treat him. Fowk wodn't ha thowt mich abaat that if it hadn't
been for him allus draggin in his friend Michael for a share, an' it wor weel known 'at Michael
had nivver existed except in his own imagination. If ivver he gate ax'd to a supper or a bit
ova feed o' ony sooart, he used to stuff hissen wol he wor foorced to lawse his wayscoit, an'
then if ther wor owt left, he'd say: 'If yo'll excuse me, ther's a bit thear 'at aw should
like to tak for Michael,' an' he used to fill his pockets wi' th' best o' th' stuff, an' mony
a rare blow aght he gate aght o' what wor supposed to be Michael's share. He used to goa to
Bradforth market two or three times in a wick, an' he allus kept his een skinned to luk aght
for a bargain; an' he didn't care what it wor, owt throo a cabbage to a cartwheel, if he could
turn a penny into three-awpence. But he didn't allus mak a gooid spec, for strange to say ther
wor other fowk 'at wor quite as wise an' even sharper nor hissen. One day he bowt a white bull
cauf, an' he wor sewer he'd getten it as cheap as muck, an' happen he had, but haivver cheap
yo buy sich a thing, it's varry likely to cause yo some bother unless yo've somewhear to put
it. It wor a varry weet day, an' throo Bradford to Keighley is a long walk, but ther wor nowt
else for it unless he tuk it with him on th' train, an' that ud be extra expense, soa he teed
a rooap raand its neck an' they started off. It's an' owd sayin' 'at youth will have its fling,'
an' this cauf wor detarmined to goa in for its share. Th' rooads worn't i' th' best order,
yet they mud ha' managed to wade throo but for th' cauf seemin' to have a strong desire to
find aght if Owd Dawdles could swim, an' whenivver it coom to a pond or a puddle it gave him
a chonce to try, but like all young caufs it hadn't mich patience, an' th' way it jurk'd him
in an' aght worn't varry pleasant for one on 'em. When they'd gooan a mile or two Dawdles wor
inclined to think it would ha been cheaper to ha taen it bi rail, to say nowt abaat th' extra
comfort. At ony rate it gave him noa troble to drive it, for it seemed to know ivvery step
o' th' rooad, an' it seem'd a deeal moor like th' cauf takkin Dawdles nor him takkin th' cauf.
He couldn't help but think 'at it had a deeal moor strength nor sense; but altho' he tried
to pity it 'coss it hadn't had th' orderation ov it's own heead, he couldn't help blamin it
for bein soa detarmined to have th' orderation o' th' way they'd to goa. When they'd getten
to th' Bull's Heead he wor ommost finished, an' he thowt as he'd getten soa weet aghtside he'd
better get a drop in, an' as he made towards th' door th' cauf went an' backed into th' passage,
an' wodn't let him enter a yard. He tried his best to get it to stir, but all to noa use. Wol
he wor tewin with it th' landlord wor scalin th' foir i' th' kitchen, an' he thowt he heard
sumdy makkin a noise, an' he went to see; an' when he saw Dawdles tryin to pool th' cauf aght
o' th' passage he thowt he'd help him, soa he gave it a prod behind wi' th' foir point, an'
it flew aght o' th' door as if it had been shot aght ov a cannon, an' its heead happenin to
leet i' th' middle o' Dawdles' wayscoit, he tummeld a backard summerset, an' ligged him daan
i' th' middle o' th' rooad, an' th' cauf laup'd ovver th' wall o' t'other side an' gallop'd
away, whiskin its tail abaat as if it wanted to cast it. Th' landlord went to see Dawdles.
'What's ta dooin thear?' he sed. 'Aw'm waitin' wol sumdy comes to help me up,' he sed. Soa
th' landlord helpt him up, an' then sed: 'Come inside an' sit thi daan a bit.' 'Nay, lad, aw've
been i' th' Bull's Heead monny a time, but tha's ommust sent th' bull's heead into me to-day.
Ther's lots o' young caufs come to yor haase beside yond o' mine, an' yo've a deeal o' bother
wi' 'em sometimes aw know, but if yo'll just tickle up wi' th' red wut foir point aw'll bet
yo'll get shut on 'em in as little time as yo did that o' mine. All aw wish is 'at tha wor
th' cauf an' me th' landlord for five minutes.'

'Well, tha has dropt in for it pretty rough, an' aw think tha's getten aboon thi share, tha
mun see if tha cannot give a trifle to Michael.'

Dawdles wodn't answer him, but set off to catch his white bull cauf, an' after chasin it raand
for a whole clock haar he gate hold o' th' rooap another time, an' they made another start
for hooam. It went varry quietly on nah, an' th' owd chap thowt it ud be a gooid idea, as he
wor soa tired, an' as ther wor nobody abaat, to get astride on it an' have a ride. Th' thowt
had hardly entered his heead befoor it wor put into practice, but if you could ha seen that
cauf yo'd ha been fit to split. It stood stock still for abaat a minit, an' then it started
off, gently at furst, but it kept gettin faster an' faster, wol at last it gate into a two
up an' two daan gallop, an' Dawdles began to find aght 'at altho' veal wor a nice tender soft
sooart o' mait when it wor deead, it grew on varry hard booans when it wor wick, an' he wor
twice as anxious to get off an' walk as he had been to get up to ride. He managed to twist
th' rooap raand its heead an' he pooled for his life, but it didn't mak a bit o' difference.
'Wo up! connot ta?' he sed, 'tha'rt as heeadstrong as tha'rt strong i'th' heead. If ivver aw
have th' orderation o' thee agean aw'll bet aw tak some o' that nowtiness aght on thee.' He'd
hardly getten th' words aght ov his maath when, as they wor passin some pighoils 'at stood
o' th' roadside, th' cauf made a dash at th' door o' one 'at wor nobbut just heigh enuff for
it get in at, brast it oppen, gooin in an' strippin off Dawdles, left him sittin i' th' middle
o' th' rooad, wonderin who'd hit him wi a looad o' bricks. Trubbles nivver come singly, an'
to mak matters war aght rushed a lot o' pigs 'at rolled him ovver an' ovver wol he couldn't
tell when he put up his hand whether it wor on his heead or his hat. Th' furst thing 'at browt
him to his senses wor sumdy shakkin him an' shaatin aght, 'What business has ta to let out
my pigs? Aw'll ha thi lock'd up!' 'Maister! maister! do let me spaik! Aw've had nowt to do
wi' th' orderation o' this mullock, an' if ther's owt lost aw'll pay for it. Hah mony wor ther?
Ther's my bull cauf i' th' pighoil an' if yo'll tak care on it for a bit aw'll goa an' see
if aw can find th' pigs.'

Th' chap, thowt that wor fair enuff, soa he let him goa, tellin him ther wor six on 'em, an'
he must find' em all. Owd Dawdles had nivver had sich a job in his life, it tuk him aboon an
haar, an' when he coom back it wor droppin dark.

'Well, has ta fun 'em?'

'Eea, they're all here.'

'Why, whear did ta find 'em?'

'Aw fan one together, an' two bi thersen, an' three amang one o' Amos's.'

'Well, that's all reight, tak thi cauf an' be off hooam. It luks a varry nice en; it's just
such a one as aw wor intendin to buy.'

'Yo can have this at yor own price, or aw'll trade wi' yo.'

'Nay, it luks too quiet for my brass, aw'd rayther ha one 'at's a' bit life in it.'

'Well, then, to be honest, aw dooan't think this will suit yo, for aw'm blessed if aw think
ther can be much life left i' this considerin what it's let aght sin aw bowt it. Gooid neet.'

'Gooid neet, owd chap. Cannot ta walk i' th' front an' let it suck thi fingers? It ud be sewer
to follow.'

'Happen it wod; but th' chap aw bowt it on suckt me quite enuff withaat lettin th' cauf suck me.'

After that he managed to get hooam wi' it withaat ony moor mishaps. It wor varry lat, an' all
th' family wor i' bed, but he detarmined he wodn't goa huntin up an' daan for a stable at that
time o' neet, soa he unlocked th' door an' tuk it into th' haase an' teed it fast to th' wringin
machine i' th' back kitchen, an' then he went upstairs to bed.

'Tha'rt varry lat, Dawdles,' sed his wife, 'has ta ridden or walked?'

'Aw walked pairt o' th' way.'

'Has ta browt owt wi' thee?'

'Eea, aw browt a bit o' mait an' aw've left it daan stairs.'

He crept into bed as well as he could, an' in a minit he wor asleep. As th' cauf had had nowt
to ait nor drink all th' day it did not feel varry oomfortable, an' in a bit it went 'B-o-o-o-o-o-o-h!'

'Dawdles! Dawdles!' shoo screamed, an' gave him a dig i' th' ribs 'at made him jump agean.

'What's th' matter wi' thee?' he sed.

'Matter enuff! Didn't ta hear yond din? Ther's summat flaysome getten into th' haase.'

'Aw heeard noa din; it's thee 'at's been dreeamin.'

'Dreeamin! Aw've nooan been dreeamin! Ger up an' see what ther is to do! Thear's a boggard
i' th' haase as sewer as aw'm here!'

'Ne'er heed it! goa to sleep an' it'll nooan mell on thee.'

'Sleep! Awst sleep nooan! Awst lig wakken o' purpose to listen. A'a! men havn't a spark o'
feelin! Thear, he's snoarin agean.'

'B-o-o-o-o-o-o-h! B-o-o-o-o-o-o-h!'

'Dawdles! Dawdles! wakken, lad; do wakken! It's th' dule hissen an' nubdy else. A'a! whativver
mun we do, an' ther hasn't one o' th' childer been to th' Sunday schooil for a fortnit! Do
get up lad, do!'

'Aw tell thee aw shalln't get up as what it is; but aw hooap if he's comed for onybody 'at
he'll tak thee furst, an' then aw can get a bit o' sleep.'

'Tha'rt a brute! an' mi mother allus sed aw should find it aght! But aw'm baan to have yond
childer aght o' bed.'

Up shoo jumpt an' went to wakken 'em, an' he wor soa worn aght 'at he dropt off to sleep agean.
Sich a hullaballoo as ther wor i' that shop when all th' eight childer wor up, yo nivver heeard,
for th' cauf kept at it, an' ther worn't one i' th' lot dar goa to see what it wor. At last
they threw up th' chamer winder and skriked wi' all ther might. Th' neighbours wor up in a
crack, an' th' poleese coom runnin to see what ther wor to do.

'Ther's a boggard i' th' haase!' they cried aght. 'Do see what it is, poleeseman, if yo pleeas.'

But as th' door wor lockt, an' nooan on 'em dar goa daan stairs to oppen it, ther wor noa way
to do but to braik a winder pane, soa th' poleese smashed one ank stuck his heead an' his lantern
in an' lewkt all raand, but ov coorse he could see nowt. But just as he wor baan to back aght
th' cauf gave another 'B-o-o-h!' Daan dropt his lantern inside, an' away flew his heead aghtside,
an' all th' fowk cluthered raand him an' ax'd him what he'd seen.

'Aw've seen nowt,' he sed, 'but aw've heeard summat.'

One o' th' childer upstairs shaats aght, 'Aw believe it's i'th' back kitchen.' An' away they
all ran raand to see if they could see it thear. Another poleese had come up, soa he gate his
lantern an' held it cloise to th' winder, an' ther wor sich a skrike an' a skutter as yo nivver
heeard nor saw. Ther wor noa mistak abaat it nah, for they'd all seen it; them 'at hadn't seen
th' een had seen th' horns, an' ther wor one or two 'at declared they'd seen a tail. Then they
held a long confab as to what they'd better do, an' th' wimmen sed they thowt it wor th' duty
o' th' poleese to goa in an' tak him up whativver he wor; but th' poleese didn't see it, for,
sed one on 'em, 'If he's th' chap aw think he is he might tak us daan wol we wor tryin to tak
him up.' At last a chap says, 'Aw've a gun, let's shooit him.' They all agreed wi' that, an'
he went an' fotched his gun. Ther wor a gooid deeal o' squarin abaat when he coom back, befoor
he could get fair aim; but at last th' poleese gate his bull's eye on th' bull's eyes. Bang!
it went, an' th' boggard disappeared. Owd Dawdles wor varry saand asleep, but when th' gun
went off he wakkened, an' wonderin what could be to do, he pooled on his britches an' ran daan
stairs an' oppened th' door just as all th' fowk wor comin raand to try an' get in, for they
hadn't a back door.

'We've peppered him his nut whoivver he is,' sed th' poleese.

'Peppered whose nut? What docs ta mean?' sed Owd Dawdles.

'We've shot th' boggard i'th' back kitchen.'

'Boggard be hang'd! Ther's noa boggard i'th' kitchen. It's nowt, nobbut a white bull cauf!
Hev yo all lost yor wit?'

Dawdles went to see what wor th' matter an' t'others followed him; but when they saw what a
mistak they'd made, the mooast on 'em slink'd off for fear they wud hev to pay for some o'th'
damage. "Truth to say, the admirers of Miss Flora, whose name is Legion, give her the credit for
all her own virtues, and blame her father and mother, and the system, for all her faults. Born,
as we have said, in a boarding-house, left entirely in charge of the nurse-maid, educated at
a fashionable day-school, brought into society before fifteen, living in the whirl, the bustle,
the luxury, and the unhomeliness of a hotel, what could you expect of Miss Flora but that she
should be, at seventeen years of age, a butterfly in her habits, a clever dunce as regards
solid knowledge, and a premature woman of the world in her tastes and manners? The apartments which
the Briggs family occupy at the Fifth Avenue Hotel are magnificently decorated and furnished,
but they do not constitute a home. Several times Mr. Briggs has offered to purchase a house
in a fashionable thoroughfare; but his wife objects to the trouble of managing unruly servants,
and terrifies Mr. Briggs out of the notion by stories of burglars
admitted, and plate stolen, and families murdered in their beds, through
the connivance of the domestics.

What more can any one desire than the Briggs family obtain at the hotel for a fixed sum per
week, and a liberal margin for extras?

The apartments are ample and comfortable; the cuisine and the wines
are irreproachable; there is a small table reserved for them, to which
they can invite whom they choose; an immense staff of servants obey
their slightest wish; their carriages, kept at a neighboring livery
stable, can be sent for at any moment; they are as secluded in their
own rooms as if they lived in another street, so far as the family
in the next suite is concerned; they are certain to meet everybody,
and can choose their own company; the spacious hotel parlors are at
their disposal whenever they wish to give an evening party, reception,
or the dansant.

 But Dawdles wor as gooid as his word, an' long befoor it
wor done he declared it wor th' cheapest mait he ivver bowt. But aitin soa mich o' one sooart
o' stuff seemed to have a strange-effect o'th' childer, for they fair seem'd to grow gaumless
an' th' hair o' ther heead stood up like a caah toppin, an' Dawdles hissen wor terrified if
one on 'em complained ov a pain i' ther heead, for fear th' horns should be buddin'.

'Nah, then, hah long are ta baan to praich,' sed one o'th' chaps 'at had been lissenin' to
this tale, 'does ta know 'at it's ommost twelve o'clock?'

'Why, nivver heed! It's th' last day i'th' year, an' we'st all have halliday to-morn. Aw havn't
tell'd yo hauf o'th' queer tricks he's noated for yet. Did yo ivver hear tell abaat that umbrella
o' his 'at he lost at Bradforth market?'

'Noa an' we dooan't want to hear ony moor to neet,' they sed, as they gate up an' knockt th'
ash aght o' ther pipes, 'tha's tell'd us quite enough for a Kursmiss stoary, an' tha mun save
th' rest for th' New Year.'

Soa they all trudged off to ther hooams to get a warm supper an' let ther wives sympathise
wi' 'em, for havin' to tramp an' tew wol past twelve o'clock at neet to mak a bit ov a livin'
for them 'at wor caar'd warm an' comfortable at hooam.

Property Huntin'.

Ther's soa monny different sooarts o' fooils 'at it's hard to tell which is th' warst, an'
th' best on us do fooilish things at times. It's varry fooilish for a young chap at's a paand
a wick to live at th' rate o' twenty-five shillin', for hahivver clivver he may be at figures
he'll be sure to find hissen in a hobble befoor long. Aw once knew a chap they called "Gentleman
Dick:" he wor nobbut a warp dresser, but to see him ov a neet, when he wor donned up an' walking
throo th' streets twirlin' his cane, yo'd ha' taen him to be a gentleman's son at th' varry
leeast. Fowk 'at knew him sed he had to live o' mail porrige all th' wick, an' a red yearin
for a treeat on a Sunday, to enable him to get new clooas, an', as it wor, he owed soa monny
tailors' bills 'at when he heeard a knock at th' door he allus had to luk aght o'th' chamer
winder to see who it wor befoor he dar oppen it. But whativver he had to put up wi he nivver
grummeld, an' Setterdy neet an Sundy wor th' time 'at he enjoyed hissen to his heart's content.
One day when he wor aght dooin the grand, he met wi a young woman i'th' train gooin to Briggus,
an' he showed her soa mich attention wol shoo tuk quite a fancy to him, an' when he ax'd her
if he might see her hooam, shoo blushed an' sed shoo didn't mind if he did. Shoo wor a varry
nice lass an' dressed as grand as yo'd wish to see an' Dick sed such nice things to her, an'
shoo smiled an' luk'd soa delighted wi him wol he hardly knew what ailed him. When they coom
to some gates leeadin to a varry big hall shoo held aght her hand to bid him gooid-bye, for
shoo sed, 'I'm at home now.' Dick begged hard on her to promise to meet him agean, an' at last
it wor arranged shoo'd see him next Sundy neet on th' canal bank at Brookfooit. All th' next
wick Dick's mates couldn't tell what to mak on him; he gave ovver singin' 'Slap Bang' an' 'Champagne
Charlie,' an' tuk to practisin' 'Gooid-bye, Sweetheart' an' 'Bonny Jean,' an' whenivver he'd
a minit or two to spare he wor scrapin' his finger nails or twistin' th' two or three hairs
'at he wor tryin to coax into a mustash. Sundy coom at last, an' what wi curlin' his hair,
an' practisin' all sooarts o' nods an' bows i'th' front o'th' lukkin'-glass it filled up th'
furst pairt o'th' day. He started off i' gooid time an' wor at th' meetin' place to a minit,
an' shoo worn't long after him.

It's a gooid job at happiness is short-lived, for if his had lasted long he'd ha gooan cleean
off th' side. Ivvery Sundy neet he tuk her for a walk, an' what delighted him moor nor all
wor to find 'at shoo worn't a bit stuck up--real ladies nivver are. He gate to know 'at her
name wor Matilda, an' 'at shoo wor nobbut twenty-five year old, an' had two nice little properties
ov her own, an' he tell'd her 'at he had a share in a big consarn, an' after they'd met an'
walked an' tawk'd a few times he began ta be varry anxious for her to name th' happy day. Shoo
made a lot o' excuses an' sed shoo didn't know what her father 'd say, but Dick sooin showed
her 'at it wor a varry easy thing ta manage it withaht lettin' him know, an' he begged soa
hard wol, after a deeal o' sobbin' an' gettin' him to sware 'at he'd allus love her as weel
as he did just then, an' 'at come what wod he'd nivver forsake her, shoo gave her consent.

When Dick bid her gooid neet an' had watched her in at th' gate, he couldn't help turnin' raand
an' smilin' at th' idea 'at in a few days he'd be son-in-law to a gentleman 'at lived i' sich
a style as that. Ther wor nowt for it but to be wed bi licence, an' hah to get th' brass Dick
couldn't tell, but at last he detarmined to tell one ov his shopmates all abaht it, an' ax
him to advance him twenty paand, to be paid back as sooin as he gate th' properties. Th' chap
agreed to let him have it if he'd give him five paand for interest, an' th' bargain wor sooin
struck. Dick lost noa time i' gettin' th' licence, an' they met one mornin' an' went to th'
church, an' wor teed as fast as th' law o'th' land could do it. He didn't know what shoo'd
say when he tuk her to his hooam, for it wor nobbut a haase an' chamer an' varry little furnitur,
tho' he'd fettled it up an' made it lewk as smart as he could. They went to a public-haase
to ther dinner, an' then they tuk a long raand abaat way hooam, an' as they kept callin' for
a refresher it wor neet when they landed.

As sooin as ivver they entered th' door he began to mak all sooarts o' excuses abaat it bein'
humble, but shoo stopt him in a minit, for shoo sed 'shoo didn't care hah little it wor soa
long as shoo wor th' mistress, for shoo'd getten reight daan stall'd o' sarvice.' 'Why,' he
sed, 'tha knaws nowt abaat sarvice Matilda, dear?' 'Aw should think aw owt to do,' shoo sed,
'for aw've been i' place ivver sin aw could walk ommost.' Dick stared like a throttled cat
for a minit, for he couldn't believe his awn ears. 'Aren't ta thi father's dowter?' he sed.
'Why aw should think soa--whose dowter does ta think aw am?' 'But isn't that thi father 'at
lives i' yond big haase?' 'What are ta tawkin abaat?' shoo sed, 'why th' chap 'at lives i'
that haase is one o'th' richest chaps i' Briggus--aw wor nobbut th' haasemaid thear--my father
lives at Salterhebble, an' hawks watter cress.' 'Why then, whear did ta get thi two properties
'at tha tell'd me tha had?' Matilda sat daan in a cheer, an' covered her face wi her handkertchy,
an' began cryin' as if her heart wor braikin.

This touched Dick, for he wor ov a tender sooart, an' he did like her after all, soa he drew
his cheer to her side, an' put his arm raand her waist an' tawk'd pratly to her an' tell'd
her shoo shouldn't ha sed shoo had 'em if shoo hadn't. 'But it's true eniff,' shoo sed; 'aw
wish it worn't, for that's what causes me to have sich an uneasy mind.' 'Why what's th' reason
on it? Is ther some daat as to who's th' reight owner? Or is ther a morgage on 'em? Give ower
freeatin', an if it's a fine day to-morn we'll goa an' luk at 'em.' 'Ther's noa daat who belangs
to 'em; a woman has 'em aght at nurse at Sowerby Brig.' 'At nurse? At nurse? What does ta mean?
An' is that what tha ment bi thi two properties? Tha'rt a deceitful gooid-for-nowt! To think
'at aw should wed a woman wi two childer!' 'Why, tha didn't expect aw should have two elephans,
did ta? But tha needn't let it bother thee mich, for one 'em's a varry little en.' 'Awst nivver
be able to put mi heead aght o'th' door ageean as long as aw live.' 'Nivver heed, lad, awl
stop at hooam an' keep thee cumpny.' 'Well, but awl tell thee, tha'll be suckt, for aw hevn't
a penny i'th' world, an' awm nowt but a warp dresser, an' cannot addle aboon two-an'-twenty
shillin' a wick, an' awm ovver heead an' heels i' debt, soa tha'll be capt abaat that!' 'Nay
awm nooan capt, coss aw knew it all monny a wick sin, for aw made it i' mi way to mak a few
enquiries, an' if tha'rt satisfied aw am, an' ther's nubdy else owt to do wi it.' 'Aw've getten
quite enuff to satisfy me, but tha can bet thi booits if it's ivver my luck to goa coortin
ageean, awl mak it i' my way to mak a few enquiries.' 'Well, it's allus safer but aw dooant
think tha'll ivver have th' chonce for nooan o' awr family dee young, but here's a two-a-three
paand aw've managed to save, an' it'll happen help to pay some o' thi debts. A few of them are
well educated, and some of these state that they adopted thieving only when all other means failed
them, and that they hoped it would keep them from sacrificing their virtue. This hope proved
vain, and imperceptibly they glided into the latter sin.

Some of these women live in handsomely furnished private rooms in
such localities as Bleecker street.

Others herd together in the lower quarters of the city. The female thief, even the most abandoned,
generally has a husband, who is himself a thief or something worse. She takes great pride in
being a married woman, and whenever she gets into trouble invariably seeks to establish a good
character by producing her marriage certificate. Even the lowest panel thieves will do this.

The
Female Thieves are divided into Pick-pockets, Shoplifters, and Panel Thieves.

"A short while ago a private detective happened to drop into a large dry-goods store in Grand
street, and observed a handsome-looking girl, about eighteen years old, dressed with the best
taste, pricing laces at a counter. An indefinable expression about her eyes was suspicious,
and as she left the store without purchasing, the spectator followed her to the corner of Essex
Market, where, walking beside her, he noticed something of a square form under her cloak. At once
suspecting it to be a stolen card of lace, he jostled against her, and, as he suspected, the
card of lace fell from under her arm to the sidewalk.

She colored, and was walking away without picking it up when the detective stopped her, said
he knew the lace was stolen, and that she must return to the shop. She begged of him not to arrest
her but restore the lace, which he did. After thanking him for not taking her into custody, she
invited him to call on her and learn the story of her life. She has two rooms in a very respectable
locality, furnished in the best manner, several of Prang's chromos are hung on the walls, and
a piano, on which she plays well, is in her sitting-room. She is very well educated, and was
driven into her way of life by being left without friends or help, and one day stole a shawl without
being discovered. Emboldened by the success of her first theft, she chose shop-lifting as her
way of life, has followed it ever since, and was never in prison. Some few call her Sarah
Wright; but those who know her best style her 'Anonyma,' as she dislikes the former title."

IV.
THE RIVER THIEVES.

The Harbor Thieves constitute one of the most dangerous and active portions of the criminal class.
There are only about fifty professional thieves of this class, but they give the police a vast
amount of trouble, and inflict great loss in the aggregate upon the mercantile community. Twenty
years ago the harbor was infested with a gang of pirates, who not only committed the most daring
robberies, but also added nightly murders to their misdeeds. Their victims were thrown into the
deep waters of the river or bay, and all trace of the foul work was removed. At length, however,
the leaders of the gang, Saul and Howlett by name, mere lads both, were arrested, convicted,
and executed, and for a while a stop was put to the robberies in the harbor; but in course of
time the infamous trade was resumed, but without its old accompaniment of murder. It is at present
carried on with great activity in spite of the efforts of the police to put a stop to it. The North
River front of the city is troubled with but one gang of these ruffian's, which has its headquarters
at the foot of Charlton street. This front is lined with piers which are well built, well lighted,
and well guarded, being occupied chiefly by steamboats plying on the river, and by the foreign
and coasting steamships. The East River is not so well guarded, the piers are dark, and the vessels,
mostly sailing ships, are left to the protection of their crews. It is in this river, therefore,
and in the harbor, that the principal depredations of the river thieves are carried on. "Slaughter
House Point," the intersection of James and South streets, and so
called by the police because of the many murders which have occurred
there, is the principal rendezvous of the East River thieves.

Hook Dock, at the foot of Cherry street, is also one of their favorite gathering places.

The life of a river thief is a very hard one, and his gains, as a rule, are small. He is subjected
to a great deal of manual labor in the effort to secure his plunder, and is exposed to all
sorts of weather. Night work in an open boat in New York harbor is not favorable to longevity,
and in eight or ten years the most robust constitution will give way before the constant attacks
of rheumatism and neuralgia. There would be some compensation to society in this but for the
fact that the police, whose duty it is to watch the river thieves, suffer in a similar way.

The river thieves generally work in gangs of three and four.

 Aw once heeard tell ov a young woman at wor a reglar glaid; one o' them sooart
'at nubdy could do owt wi'; tawk abaat taming a shrew! why, net all th' shrews in Shrewsbury
wor a match for her. But a chap 'at lived net far off, thowt shoo wor a varry bonny lass, an'
he felt sure he could manage her, soa he went an' made love in his best fashion, an' ivery
time shoo call'd him a nasty offald scamp, he sed he lov'd hur moor an' moor; soa at last shoo
cooil'd daan, an' all things were made sweet, an' befoor long they gate wed. Ov coorse they'd
a few friends to ther drinkin, an' a bit ov a donce at after, an' then a drop o' whisky an'
hot water, an' when th' husband had getten a glass or two into him, he began to tell th' cumpany
ha he'd tamed hur. 'Why,' he sed, 'aw can do owt aw like wi' her nah, shoo's as gentle as a
lamb.' 'If that's thy noation,' shoo says, 'th' sooiner tha gets shut on it an' th' better!'
Soa shoo made noa moor to do, but gave him a crack ovver th' nooas wi' her naive, an' in abaat
a minit it wor swell'd as big as a cauf blether. But when aw wakken'd aw sowt up an' daan,
but nowhear could aw find th' valentine.

Nah, th' vally ov a thing depends oft o'th' use ov a thing; her's an old sayin 'A peck o' March
dust is worth a king's ransom,' but aw should think 'at th' vally o'th' ransom owt to depend
o'th' vally o'th' king. It's oft capt me ha it is 'at becos one chap is son ov a king, an'
another is son ov a cart-driver, 'at one should be soa mich moor thowt on nor tother. Noa daat
we should all be sons an' dowters o' kings an' queens if we could, but then ther'd have to
be a deal moor kings an' queens, or else they'd niver be able to keep th' stock up. Net 'at
awm findin fault wi' awr Queen, net aw marry! shoo's done her best noa daat, an' her childer
seem tryin to follow her example. But then, when princes an' princesses get moor plentyful
they'll be less thowt on; it'll be th' same wi' them as it wor wi' th' umbrellas at one time,
for th' chap 'at had th' furst wor run after wi' ivery body, an' when ther were nobbut two
or three, fowk allus ran to th' winder to have a luk at 'em; but whoiver runs to luk at umbrellas
nah? It wor th' same wi' steam engines, it's getten th' same wi' velosipeeds, an it'll be th'
same wi' princes, princesses, or owt else, as sooin as they get common, unless they've summat
moor to depend on nor a grand title, fowk ull tak but little noatice. We cannot all be fine
fowk, but we may all be gooid fowk, if we try, an' a gooid cart-driver ull be better nor a
bad king at th' finish. Rich fowk ha troubles as weel as poor, but ther's noa need for onybody
to be troubled long; for if its summat they can't help its fooilish to freeat, an' if its summat
they can help, why the deuce don't they?

Its fooilish to freeat, but fowk will freeat sometimes. Well, nivver heed! 'April shaars bring
May flowers,' soa we willn't grumel if we get catched i' one nah an' then an' get a gooid sooaking,
for ther's nowt i'th' world bonnier nor flaars, even cauliflaars. Ther's lots o' bonny things
i'th' world besides flaars; ther's bonny words, an' if fowk wod nobbut use 'em we should all
get on a deeal better. Aw remember once bein in a public haase, an' ther wor two chaps sat
quietly suppin ther pints o' fourpenny, when all at once one o' ther wives coom in, an her
een fair blazed when shoo saw him. 'O, soa tha'rt here are ta?' shoo began, 'soa this is th'
way th' brass gooas is it! tha nasty gooid-for-nowt! Aw could like to smash thi face! sittin
thear throo morn to neet sossin like a pig, an' leavin me an' th' childer to do as we con!
Ha con ta fashion? Tha desarves teein to a cart tail an' hidin' throo th' streets, tha low-lived
villain! All th' time shoo wor talkin shoo wor shakin her neive in his face, an' when he could
edge in a word he sed. 'Aw'l tell thee what it is, this is nobbut mi third pint to-day, an'
aw wor just commin hooam, but tha can hook it, for aw shall come when aw'm ready, an net before,
an' that will'nt be yet a bit.' Just wol they wor fratchin tother chap's wife coom seekin him,
an' as sooin as shoo saw him shoo smiled an' sed, 'O, aw've fun thi, come lad, aw want thee
at hooam, awr little Jack has getten his new clogs on an' he will'nt let me put him to bed
till tha's seen 'em, tha'll be like to come.' 'Howd a minit,' he sed, as he emptied his pint,
then he went away wi' her. Tother stopt. Soa mich for kindness.

An' ther's moor ways nor one o' bein kind. Nah, yo've oft heeard fowk say, 'Niver cast a claot
till May goas aght.' That's all varry gooid as far as regards top coits an' flannel shirts
an sich like. But ther's another thing, its just abaat th' time for fowk to get new clooas
an' throw off th' old ens; an' aw've a word or two to say abaat that, for ther's some poor
fowk aw see sometimes 'at cannot cast a claot; th' fact is, they've nowt else to put on. Ha
monny scoor fowk do we meet as we walk abaat, 'ats hardly a rag to ther back, or aw should
say they've nowt but rags, an' that's what prevents 'em havin a chonce to addle brass to buy
ony fresh ens. Ha monny have to creep aght o'th' seet, into ony sooart ov a low hoil, mix up
wi bad compny,--first pine, then beg, then stail--an' all this becoss they've had th' misfortun
to be ragged. If ther's one thing moor nor another 'at fowk mak a mistak in, it's sellin ther
old clooas. Some may say they can't affoord to give 'em: Then aw say, wear 'em a bit longer
till yo can; ther'll somdy be thankful for 'em after then. Ivery body can affoord to be charitable
to a certain extent, an' ther's noa charity does as mich gooid wi as little cost as givin yor
old clooas. Luk what comfort yo give a chap; then as sooin as he sees his sen luk respectable,
he begins to want to be soa, he feels to have moor pluck, he doesn't hing daan his heead, he's
a better chonce to win a honest livin, an' yo may safely think yo've gien a chap a lift on
his way, when yo've gien him yor old clooas.

'If the 8th of June is a rainy day, it foretells a wet harvest, so men say,' but whether it
does or it doesn't aw cannot tell: if it does we mun mak th' best on it, that's all; but we've
one bit o' comfort left even then, for its sure to be fair at Halifax o'th' 24th. It's grand
to goa to th' Fair an' see fowk starin at th' pictures; an' its cappin to harken to th' show
fowk shaatin an' bawlin an' tellin all sooarts o' tales to draw th' brass aght o' yor pockets.
Then ther's th' swingin booats, them's for cooarters: they're a grand institution for young
fowk, for if a chap can get his young woman to get in, he's sure of a chonce to get his arm
raand her waist, an' give her a bit of a squeeze. Then ther's th' flyin' horses, whear a chap
can get made mazy for a penny: wheniver aw see 'em they allus remind me ov a chap aw knew;
he stood abaat six foot two in his stockin feet, an' weighed abaat six stooan an' a hauf; an'
one day he'd been poorly a bit, soa he thowt he'd ax a friend 'at had a donkey if he'd lend
it him. 'Tha can have it an' welcome,' th' chap said, 'but aw'm feeard thi legs is too long.'
'Oh ne'er heed that,' he sed, 'if aw find 'em to trail aw'l hold 'em up.' Soa he gate it, an
as he wor varry leet they went on nicely for a bit, but just as he wor comin on Charlestaan,
a chap stopt him to ax him what they called that old church, soa he dropt daan his feet on
to'th floor and began to explain an' as sooin as he'd done that, th' donkey walked away leavin
him thear striddlin like a clooas peg. As sooin as he'd finished he sed 'gie up!' an he thowt
o' sittin daan; an' he did, but it wor soa mich lower daan wol he thowt his back wor brokken;
when he luk'd raand he saw Neddy trottin up th' Haley Hill. 'Tha's tow't me a lesson,' he sed,
'an' for th' futur, as long as iver aw can do for misen, aw'l niver seek onybody's ass istance.

Ther's nowt like bein independent, an mooast fowk have a chonce if they'll nobbut 'mak hay
wol th' sun shines,' an' if yo dooant mak it then yo'll niver be able to mak it at ony other
time. If yo want to mak love, yo can mak that when th' mooin shines, but it will'nt do for
hay. Aw remember a queer tale 'at they used to tell ov a chap 'at had some strange nooations,
an' allus thowt his own way best. An' one day as some chaps were gooin past his farm, they
saw him runnin up an' daan i' th' front o' th' lathe, wi' a empty wheelbarro, and then rush
in, an' upset it, and aght agean. 'Why,' says one, 'aw'm sure Ike must be crack'd, whativer
can he be dooin?' Soa they went to ax him. 'What's up nah Ike?' said one, 'tha'll kill thisen
if tha gooas on like that, are ta trainin for a match or summat?' 'Yo dooant know,' sed Ike,
'but aw'l let yo into a saycret; yo see aw'd getten all th' grass cut yesterday, an' aw fancied
it wor baan to rain, soa aw haased it just green as it wor, an' nah aw'm wheelin sunshine in
to dry it wi.' 'Well, tha'rt a bigger fooil nor aw tuk thi for! Does ta think tha can wheel
sunshine into th' lathe, same as horse-muck?' 'Thee mind thi own business,' says Ike, 'aw should
think aw've lived long enuff to know what aw'm dooin, an' when aw want taichin aw'll send for
thee.' Soa they left him to his wheelin, but ha long he kept at it they didn't know, but in
a few days they saw him agean an' axed him ha he fan his system to answer? An' he says 'Why,
aw dooant get on varry weel, but it is'nt th' fault o' th' system, th' fact is, aw connot do
it till aw get a bigger barro. But he wod'nt give in. An' ther's lots o' th' same sooart.

Perseverance is a grand thing. If it wornt for tewin, an' sewin, an' plowin whear wod th' harvest
be? An ther's noa greater blessin nor a gooid harvest. Ther's a deal o' fowk have a harvest
abaat this time. Flaar shows reap a benefit if th' weather be fine. Ther's nowt aw like better
nor to goa to a flaar show, moor especially sich as th' Haley Hill, Ovenden, Siddal, or Elland,
or ony other, whear th' mooast o' th' stuff has been grown bi workin fowk. Th' plants may'nt
be as bonny, but they luk bonnier to me, an' they tell a tale 'at yo cannot mistak. Ha monny
haars' enjoyment have they gien to th' fowk 'ats growin 'em? An' ha oft have they kept chaps
aght o' th' alehaase? An' then see ha praad prize winners are! Aw allus feel sooary 'at they
cannot all win th' furst prize, for aw'm sure they desarve it for ther trouble. An' if yo nooatice,
yo're sure to see a nice cheerful woman or two, stood cloise aside o'th' plants 'at's wun owt,
an' if yo wait a bit yo'll see her ivery nah an' then, touch somdy o'th' elbow as they're gooin
past, an' point at th' ticket an' say, 'sithee, them's awr's!' 'What them 'at's won th' prize?'
'Eea.' 'Why they're grand uns!' An' then shoo'l whisper in her ear, 'Ther's nubdy can touch
aw'r Simon 'at growin thease, tha sees he understands it.' A'a Simon! shoo's a deeal o' faith
i' thee, an' if tha's made muck wi thi clogs sometimes when tha's trailed in withaat wipin
thi feet, shoo forgives thi nah. Wimmen's varry soft after all an' its as weel it is soa, for
ther's monny a gooid harvest a' happiness been gethered in at wod ha been lost but for a soft
word or two.

Another old sayin', 'September blow soft, till the fruit's i'th' loft,' for if strong winds
blow nah it'll spoil all th' apples an' stuff, an' it'll be soa mich war for fowk 'at has to
addle ther livin for whativer else fowk differ abaat, aw think they're all agreed o' one point,
an' that is, ther's noa livin long withaat aitin. But it's hard wark gettin a livin nah days,
an' them 'at's comfortably off owt to be thankful. But it's cappin i' what queer ways some
fowk do get a livin! Aw knew a chap once 'at stood abaat seven feet, an' he wor soa small he
luk'd like a walkin clooas prop. Talk abaat skin and grief! aw niver did see sich a chap, an'
his face luk'd to be all teeth an' een. He used to waive a bit at one time, but he gate seck'd
becos his maister catched him asleep in a stove pipe. But one day he wor wanderin abaat, an'
wonderin ha to get a livin, an' in a bit a chap comes up to him, an' says, 'Does ta want a
job?' 'Aw do that, can yo find me one, maister?' he sed. 'Well,' says th' chap, 'tha'rt just
th' lad 'at aw want if tha'll goa, for aw keep a druggist's shop at Sowerby Brig, an' if tha'll
stand i'th' winder an' flay fowk into fits as they goa past, aw'll gie thee a paand a wick.'
'It's a bargain,' he sed, 'an' he went wi' him, an' aw've been tell'd 'at that druggist made
a fortun i' twelve months wi nowt but sellin fit physic. Whether that's true or net aw will'nt
say, but aw'm sure ther's some fowk at Sowerby Brig 'at dooant seem altogether reight even yet.

An' its hardly to be wondered at, for one hauf o'th' fowk we meet i'th' streets on a neet,
seem to be druffen. Aw hear some queer tales sometimes, but aw dooant tell all aw know. 'Ale
sellers shouldn't be tale tellers.' But aw'm sooary to say at th' mooast ale sellers at' aw
know are varry fond o' taletellin. Ther's nowt shows a chap's littleness as mich as to be allus
talkin abaat his own or somdy else's private affairs; an' ther's nowt likely to produce moor
bother nor that system o' tittle tattlin abaat other fowk's consarns. Ther's a deal o' blame
ligg'd o' th' wimmen sometimes, for gossipin ovver a sup o' rum an' tea: an' noa daat its true
enuff, but aw think some o' th' men hav'nt mich room to talk, for they gossip as mich ovver
ther ale as ivver wimmen do ovver ther tea. Little things 'at's sed in a thowtless way sometimes
cause noa end o' bother, an' it's as weel to be careful for ther's trouble enuff. A chap an'
his wife 'at lived neighbors to me, had a word or two one neet, an' soa shoo went up stairs
to sulk; an' when he sat daan to his supper he thowt he'd have her on a bit, soa he cut all
th' mait off a booan, an' then he sed to' his oldest lass. 'Here, Mary! Tak this up stairs
to thi mother an' tell her 'at thi father has sent her a booan to pick.' Th' lass tuk it up
to her mother an' tell'd her 'at her father'd sent it, an' as sooin as shoo saw it, shoo says,
'Tak it him back, an' tell him 'at he isn't thi father, an' that'll be a booan for him to pick.'--An'
it wor an' all, an' it's stuck in his throit to this day, soa yo see what bother that's caused.

It's nivver wise to be rackless naythur i' word nor deed, for whativver yo plot an plan agean
other fowk it's ommost sewer to roll back on yorsens an' trap yor tooas if it does nowt else;
'Fowk 'at laik wi' fire mun expect a burn.' An soa all yo 'at intend to keep up Gunpaader plot
munnot grummel if yo get warmed a bit. But gunpaader plot isn't th' only plot 'at gets browt
to a finish this month; ther's lots o' plottin an' planin besides that. Ther's monny a chap
'at's been langin for a year or two to be made a taan caancillor 'at's been havin all his friends
to ther supper, an' 'at for th' last month or two has been stoppin fowk 'at he's met, an' shakin
hands wi 'em, an' axin all abaat ha ther wives an' childer are gettin on, tho' he's passed
th' same fowk monny a hundred times befoor an' nivver spokken to 'em at all. It's all plottin.
A'a this little bit o' pride! A'a this desire to be summat thowt on! Aw dooant know ha we should
get on withaat it! Ther's a gooid deeal o' califudge i'th' world after all, but aw dooant think
it does mich harm, for mooast fowk can see throo it. But it allus maks me smile when aw goa
to a ward meetin, an' hear furst one an' then another get up an' thank a caancillor for dooin
soa mich for 'em, an' prayin 'at he'll suffer hissen to be re-elected; when at th' same time
they know 'at he's ready to fall ov his knees to beg on 'em to send him agean. Well, aw dooant
know why a chap shouldn't be thanked for dooin that 'at's a pleasure to hissen an' a benefit
to others! It's nobbut th' same as me writin this, it suits me to write it, an' it suits others
to read it, yet aw think aw'm entitled to some thanks after all.

But one munnot expect to get all they're entitled to, an' its a jolly gooid job we dooant,
for if we did ther'd be a lot on us 'at ud have to be burried at th' public expense. We're
nooan on us too gooid, but 'It's niver too late to mend,' an' it's niver too sooin to begin,
soa nah 'at we've getten to th' end ov another year, let us carefully reckon up an see ha we
stand. Aw fancy we shall all find 'at ther's lots o' room for improvement yet, an' ther's nowt
at yo can do 'at's likely to give yo moor satisfaction nor to detarmine to do better for th'
future. A chap's allus awther better or war at th' end o'th' year nor what he wor at th' beginnin,
an aw'm sure iverybody'll feel pleased to know at they're all o'th' mendin hand. At length they
fancied they heard sounds arise from the plain before them: suppressed noises, such as must unavoidably
be made by a force on its passage; and Alfred again sought the cell
of Dunstan, yet dared not enter, urgent though the emergency seemed. Ther's nubdy enjoys a bit
ov a spree better nor aw do, but ther's one thing aw dooant like, an that is to be pestered
off my life booath at hooam an abroad wi fowk commin an sayin, 'Aw wish yo a merry Christmas
an' a happy New Year,' when all th' time aw know weel enuff they wish nowt at sooart, but just
come for what they can get. Nah if sich-like wod nobbut come an' say plain aght, 'we come to
see what yo'll give us, an' we dooant care a button whether yo've a merry Christmas or net,'
why, then yo'd know what to mak on 'em. Ony body at's ony gooid wishes to give, let 'em give
'em, but aw'm blow'd if aw care to buy' em, becoss they arn't genuine at's to sell. Th' price
may be low enuff--a glass o' whisky or a shillin, but unless they come free gratis, for nowt,
aw'd rather net be bothered wi' 'em. Shoolers, please tak nooatice.

