A large, masterful man was Opechancanough, sachem of the Pamunkeys. The Indians themselves
said that he was not a Powatan, nor any relation of their king; but that he came from the princely
line of a great Southern nation, distant many leagues.  This may be the reason that, although
he was allied to Chief Powatan, he never joined him in friendship to the whites, who, he claimed,
if not checked would over-run the Indians' hunting-grounds.

The Indians of Virginia did not wish to have the white men among them. They were living well
and comfortably, before the white men came; after the white men came, with terrible weapons
and huge appetites which they expected the Indians to fill, and a habit of claiming all creation,
clouds veiled the sky of the Powatans, their corn-fields and their streams were no longer their
own.

Powatan, the head sachem, collected guns and hatchets and planned to stem the tide while it
was small.  But these English enticed his daughter Pocahontas aboard a vessel, and there held
her for the good behavior of her father.

Pocahontas married John Rolfe, an English gentleman of the colony.  Now for the first time
Powatan was won, for he loved his daughter and the honest treatment of her at English hands
pleased him.

Opechancanough but bided his time, until 1622.  He was a thorough hater; his weapons were treachery
as well as open war; he had resolved never to give up his country to the stranger.

Meanwhile, Pocahontas had died, in 1617, aged about twenty-two, just when leaving England for
a visit home.

Full of years and honors (for he had been a shrewd, noble-minded king) the sachem Powatan himself
died in 1618, aged over three score and ten. His elder brother O-pi-tchi-pan became head sachem
of the Powatan league.  He was not of high character like the great chief's.  Now Opechancanough
soon sprang to the front, as champion of the nation.

Pocahontas was no longer a hostage, the English settlements and plantations had increased,
the English in England were in numbers of the stars, and the leaves, and the sands; and something
must be done at once.

Seventy-eight years of age he was, when he struck his blow.  With the fierce Chick-a-hom-i-nies
backing him, he had enlisted tribe after tribe among the Powatans.  Yet never a word of the
plan reached the colonists.

For several years peace had reigned in fair Virginia.  The Indians were looked upon as only
"a naked, timid people, who durst not stand the presenting of a staff in the manner of a firelock,
in the hands of a woman"!  "Firelocks" and modern arms they did lack, themselves, but Opechancanough,
the old hater, had laid his plans to cover that.

March 22, 1622, was the date for the attack, which should "utterly extinguish the English settlements
forever."  Yet "forever" could not have been the hope of Opechancanough.  Here in Virginia
the white man's settlements had spread through five hundred miles, and on the north the Pilgrim
Fathers had started another batch in the country of the Pokanokets.

The plan of Opechancanough succeeded perfectly.  Keeping the date secret, tribe after tribe
sent their warriors, to arrive at the borders of the Virginia settlements in the night of March 21.

"Although some of the detachments had to march from great distances, and through a continued
forest, guided only by the stars and moon, no single instance of disorder or mistake is known
to have happened.  One by one they followed each other in profound silence, treading as nearly
as possible in each other's steps, and adjusting the long grass and branches which they displaced.
They halted at short distances from the settlements, and waited in death-like stillness for
the signal of attack."

A number of Indians with whom the settlers were well acquainted had been doing spy work.  It
was quite the custom for Indians to eat breakfast in settlers' homes, and to sleep before the
settlers' fire-places.  In this manner the habits of every family upon the scattered plantations
were known.  There were Indians in the fields and in the houses and yards, pretending to be
friendly, but preparing to strike.

The moment agreed upon arrived.  Instantly the peaceful scene changed. Acting all together,
the Indians in the open seized hatchet, ax, club and gun, whatever would answer the purpose,
and killed.  Some of the settlers had been decoyed into the timber; many fell on their own
thresholds; and the majority died by their own weapons.

The bands in ambush rushed to take a hand.  In one hour three hundred and forty-seven white
men, women and children had been massacred.  It was a black, black deed, but so Opechancanough
had planned.  Treachery was his only strength.

This spring a guerilla warfare was waged by both sides.  Blood-hounds were trained to trail
the Indians.  Mastiffs were trained to pull them down.  But the colonists needed crops; without
planted fields they would starve.  The governor proposed a peace, that both parties might plant
their corn.  When the corn in the Indians' fields had ripened, and was being gathered, the
settlers made their treacherous attack, in turn.  They killed without mercy, destroyed the
Indians' supplies, and believed that they had slain Opechancanough.

There was much rejoicing, but Opechancanough still lived, in good health.  He had been too
clever for the trap.

Rarely seen, himself, by the settlers, he continued to direct the movements of his warriors.
He refused to enter the settlements.  Never yet had he visited Jamestown.  Governors came and
went, but Opechancanough remained, unyielding.

He was eighty-seven when, in 1630, a truce was patched up, that both sides might rest a little.
So far the Indians had had somewhat the best of the fighting; the colonists had not driven
them to a safe distance.

The white men were growing stronger, the red men were improving not at all, and Opechancanough
knew that the truce would surely be broken.  He stayed aloof nine years, waiting, while the
colonists grew careless. At last they quarreled among themselves.

This was his chance.  From the Chickahominies and the Pamunkeys the word was spread to the
other tribes.  The second of his plans ripened. Opechancanough had so aged that he was unable
to walk.  He set the day of April 18, 1644, as the time for the general attack.  He ordered
his warriors to bear him upon the field in a litter, at the head of five united tribes.

Again the vengeful league of the Powatans burst upon the settlers in Virginia.  From the mouth
of the James River back inland over a space of six hundred square miles, war ravaged for two
days; three hundred and more settlers were killed, two hundred were made captives, homes and
supplies were burned to ashes.

It looked as though nothing would stand before Opechancanough--indeed, as though the end of
Virginia had come.  But in the midst of the pillage the work suddenly was stopped, the victorious
Indians fled and could not be rallied.  They were frightened, it is said, by a bad sign in the sky.

Governor Sir William Berkeley called out every twentieth man and boy of the home-guard militia,
and by horse and foot and dog pursued.

Next we may see the sachem Opechancanough, in his one hundredth year, borne hither-thither
in his bough litter, by his warriors, directing them how to retreat, where to fight, and when
to retreat again.  He suffered severely from hunger and storm and long marches, until the bones
ridged his flabby skin, he had lost all power over his muscles, and his eyelids had to be lifted
with the fingers before he could gaze beyond them.

Governor Berkeley and a squadron of horsemen finally ran him down and captured him.  They took
him, by aid of his litter-bearers, to Jamestown.

He was a curious sight, for Jamestown.  By orders of the governor, he was well treated, on
account of his great age, and his courageous spirit.  The governor planned to remove him to
England, as token of the healthfulness of the Virginia climate.

But all this made little difference to Opechancanough.  He had warred, and had lost; now he
expected to be tortured and executed.  He was so old and worn, and so stern in his pride of
chiefship, that he did not care.  He had been a sachem before the English arrived, and he was
a sachem still.  Nobody heard from his set lips one word of complaint, or fear, or pleading.
Instead, he spoke haughtily.  He rarely would permit his lids to be lifted, that he might look
about him.

His faithful Indian servants waited upon him.  One day a soldier of the guard wickedly shot
him through the back.

The wound was mortal, but the old chief gave not a twinge; his seamed face remained as stern
and firm as if of stone.  He had resolved that his enemies should see in him a man.

Only when, toward the end, he heard a murmur and scuff of feet around him, did he arouse. 
He asked his nurses to lift his eyelids for him. This was done.  He coldly surveyed the people
who had crowded into the room to watch him die.

He managed to raise himself a little.

"Send in to me the governor," he demanded angrily.

Governor Berkeley entered.

"It is time," rebuked old Opechancanough.  "For had it been my fortune to have taken Sir William
Berkeley prisoner, I should not have exposed him as a show to my people."

Then Opechancanough died, a chief and an enemy to the last.

The Po-kan-o-kets formed another league, like the league of the Powatans.  There were nine
tribes, holding a section of southeastern Massachusetts and of water-broken eastern Rhode Island.

The renowned Massasoit of the Wam-pa-no-ag tribe was the grand sachem. In Rhode Island, on
the east shore of upper Narragansett Bay was the royal seat of Montaup, or Mount Hope, at the
village Pokanoket.

Great was the sachem Mas-sa-so-it, who ruled mildly but firmly, and was to his people a father
as well as a chief.

Of his children, two sons were named Wamsutta and Metacomet.  They were renamed, in English,
Alexander and Philip, by the governor of this colony of Plymouth.

Alexander was the elder.  He had married Wetamoo, who was the young squaw sachem of the neighboring
village of Pocasset, to the east. Philip married her sister, Woo-to-ne-kau-ske.

When late in 1661 the sage Massasoit died, Alexander became grand sachem of the Pokanoket league.

Now the long reign of Massasoit had been broken.  With him out of the way, certain hearts,
jealous of the Wampanoags and their alliance with the English, began to stir up trouble for
the new sachem.  They reported him as planning a revolt against Plymouth Colony.

There may have been some truth in this.  The Puritans were a stern, strict people, who kept
what they had seized, and who constantly added more.  To them the Indians were heathens and
inferiors; not free allies, but subjects of the king of England.

Before the landing of the Pilgrims in the Indians' territory, sailing ships, touching at the
New England shore, had borne Indians away into slavery.  Since the landing of the Pilgrims,
the Pequots had been crushed in battle, and Captain Miles Standish had applied knife and rope
to other Indians.

So some doubts as to the wisdom of Massasoit's treaty with the English began to spread through
the Pokanokets.

The Plymouth officers ordered Alexander to appear at court and answer the charges against him.
When he delayed, Major Josiah Winslow was sent to get him.  The major took ten armed men, and
proceeded for Mount Hope.  On the way he found Alexander and party in a hunting lodge, their
guns leaning outside.

The major seized the guns.  With pistol in hand he demanded that Alexander come with him, or
die.  Alexander claimed that he was a sachem and free ruler, not a dog.  He "fell into a raging
passion."  He had a proper pride, and a fierce temper.

He agreed to go, as a sachem attended by his own followers.  The charge against him never was
pressed, because his rage and shame at the insult threw him into a fever, from which he soon died.

He had reigned only a few months.  In this year 1662 Philip or Metacomet took his place as
grand sachem of the Pokanokets.  The death of his brother grieved him.  Wetamoo, the young
widow, said that Alexander had been poisoned by his captors, the English.  The story counted,
and the fate of Alexander was not a pleasant story, to the Pokanokets.

Philip saw trouble ahead.  His neighbors the Narragansetts had long been at outs with the English.
In his father's reign their old chief Mi-an-to-no-mah had been handed over by the Puritans
of Connecticut to Chief Uncas of the Mohegans for execution in the Indian way.  The Narragansetts
were friendly with the Pokanokets; they rather looked upon Philip as their adopted leader.

His lands were rapidly going, the English were rapidly spreading, the Puritan laws and religion
were being forced upon him.  It was galling that he, a king by his own right, should be made
a subject of another king whom he had never seen.

The New England colonists could not forget how the Virginia colonists had been surprised and
killed by the Powatans.  They watched King Philip closely.  In 1671 he was said to be complaining
that certain of them were trespassing on his hunting grounds.  This led to the report that
his people were holding councils, and were repairing their guns and sharpening their hatchets,
as if for war.

So King Philip, like his brother King Alexander, was summoned to the Puritan court, to be examined.
He had not forgotten the treatment of Alexander.  He went, but he filled half the town meeting-house
with his armed warriors.

There he denied that war was planned against the English.  He was persuaded to sign a paper
which admitted his guilt and bound him to deliver up all his guns.

He decided not to do this latter thing.  To give up his guns would leave him bare to all enemies.

He was made to sign other papers, until little by little the Pokanokets seemed to have surrendered
their rights, except their guns.  The white people, and not Philip, ruled them.

Then, in the first half of 1675 the affair of John Sassamon occurred.

John Sassamon was an educated Indian who had returned to the Wampanoags, after preaching. 
He spoke English, and was used by King Philip at Mount Hope as secretary.  He thought that
he had found out war plans, and he carried the secrets to Plymouth.

The Indian law declared that he should die.  In March his body was discovered under the ice
of a pond of Plymouth Colony.  His neck had been broken.

To the Pokanoket idea, this had been legal execution ordered by the sachem.  The English called
it a murder.  They arrested three of King Philip's men.  These were tried in court before a
jury of twelve colonists and five Indians.  They were found guilty.  Two were hanged, the third
was shot.

That was the end of peace.  Miantonomah of the Narragansetts had been handed over by the colonists
to the law of the Mohegans, but when the Pokanokets tried a similar law against a traitor,
they had been punished.  King Philip could no longer hold back his young men.

He had been working hard, in secret, to enlist all the New England tribes in a league greater
than the league of Opechancanough, and by one stroke clean New England of the white colonists.
The time set was the next year, 1676.  The Narragansetts had promised then to have ready four
thousand warriors.

But when the word from the English court was carried to Pokanoket, that the three prisoners
were to be killed, and that Philip himself was likely to be tried, the warriors of the Wampanoags
broke their promise to wait.

They danced defiantly.  They openly sharpened their knives and hatchets upon the stone window-sills
of settlers' houses, and made sport of the English.

A sudden cold fear spread through New England.  A blood-red cloud seemed to be hovering over.
Signs were seen in the sky--a great Indian bow, a great Indian scalp, racing horsemen; a battle
was heard, with boom of cannon and rattle of muskets and whistling of bullets.  The pious Puritans
ordered a fast day, for public prayer, in the hope that God would stay the threatened scourge.

Upon that very day, June 24,1675, the war burst into flame.  At the town of Swansea, Massachusetts,
near the Rhode Island border, and the nearest settlement to Mount Hope, a Wampanoag was wounded
by an angered colonist.  The Indians were glad.  They believed that the party whose blood was
shed first would be victors.  The colonists returning from town meeting were fired upon; that
day seven were killed and several wounded.  King Philip's young men had acted without orders.

When King Philip heard, he wept.  He was not yet ready for the war, but now he had to fight.
He had at hand sixty Wampanoag men of fighting age; all the Pokanoket league numbered six hundred
warriors.  Against these could be mustered thousands of the colonists, whose ninety towns extended
through Massachusetts, and Connecticut, and into present Rhode Island.  Therefore he must act
swiftly, or his cause was lost.  All depended upon his appeal to the inland tribes on the north.

The powerful Narragansetts, his neighbors on the west, were not prepared, and sent no warriors
at once; but certain of the other tribes did respond with gun and hatchet and fire.

Before the colonists could rally under a skillful leader, the forces of King Philip were successful.
He had plenty of guns and ammunition. Town after town in Plymouth Colony of southeastern Massachusetts
was laid in ashes by fierce surprise attacks.  The scene shifted to western Massachusetts.
The Nipmucks of the Connecticut River, there, aided in the dreadful work.

Throughout the summer and fall of 1675 all settled Massachusetts rang with the war-whoops of
the Pokanokets and their allies.  King Philip proved himself a master in Indian warfare to
strike, and run, and strike again.  In this one brief space he earned his title, the Terror
of New England, not only because of his first successes, but also because during the span of
more than a year no Englishman recognized his voice in battle, and only once was his face seen
by his enemies.

Long after the war his name was used for frightening children.

"King Philip is coming!"  And the naughtiest child would quiet and seek his mother's skirt.

Although tortures and brutal killings were committed, King Philip himself opposed this.  Many
stories are told of his kindness to captives.  He showed fully as much mercy as the colonists did.

Some tribes had failed to help.  The Mohegans under Uncas enlisted with the English, which
was expected.  The "praying Indians," as the Christianized Pokanokets were known, also either
stayed aloof, or else were used as scouts against their people.  The New Hampshire Indians
refused to take up the hatchet, and the Narragansetts still hung back.

King Philip's own home of Pokanoket or Mount Hope had of course early been seized by the English
troops.  They had planned to keep him from escaping to the mainland in the north.  But he easily
moved his men out, by way of the narrow neck that connected with the mainland.

Now he was a roamer, until in this winter of 1675 he decided to stay among the Narragansetts,
in southern Rhode Island, and renew his league.

To compel the Narragansetts to deliver over the King Philip people, an army of fifteen hundred
was raised by Massachusetts, Plymouth and Connecticut colonies.

South Rhode Island was then an Indian wilderness, heavily timbered and deep with swamps.  Near
present South Kingston, in the Narragansett country, upon a meadow upland amidst a dense swamp
Philip had built a fort containing five hundred wigwams.  He had built well.

The only entrance from the swamp was defended by a high log fence or series of palisades. 
In addition, around a space of five acres he had laid a thick hedge of felled trees.  A single
log bridged the water separating the fort from the drier land beyond.  The wigwams were made
bullet-proof by great stores of supplies piled against their walls, inside.

It was reported that he had three thousand persons in the fort--these being his Pokanokets,
and many Narragansett men, women and children. The place was called Sunke-Squaw.

Treachery it was that broke the power of King Philip.  An Indian named Peter sought the English
and offered to show them how to get in.  After a long march amidst bitter cold and driving
snow, they arrived at one o'clock in the afternoon of December 19.  They were short of provisions,
and very weary.  For a time matters went ill with them. Again and again their attacking parties
were swept from the single log that Peter the traitor had showed to them.  A number of officers
and men had fallen, before, pressing hard, with night at hand, a party succeeded in entering
the fort.

Here the hot fight passed from wigwam to wigwam.  Some of the English were killed by balls
from their own soldiers.  Through all the swamp the battle raged.

"They run, they run!" sounded the loud cries, from the English within the fort.  Their comrades
on the outside hastened--scrambling, wading, straddling the log or knee-deep in the half frozen
mire.

Indian women and children and warriors had taken refuge in the wigwams. Torches were applied,
burning them or driving them out to be shot down. Officers tried to prevent the burning of
the wigwams, in order to save the provisions, but the fire spread.

So by night the fort was in ruins.  The Indians were killed, captured or fleeing.  Seven hundred
had been killed by bullet and sword, three hundred more perished by cold and hunger and wounds;
how many old men, women and children had burned to death, no one knew.  But a third of the
Narragansett nation had been slain or taken captive, and of the Pokanokets only a remnant was left.

Eighty killed, was the report of the Connecticut troops alone.  There were one hundred and
fifty men grievously wounded.  As the soldiers had destroyed the fort and its provisions, they
had no shelter.  Through a furious snowstorm they made a miserable night march of eighteen
miles before even the wounded could be attended to.

King Philip was now a fugitive, but he was by no means done fighting. He removed to the interior
of Massachusetts--it is said that he traveled clear to the Mohawks of New York, and asked their
aid in this war against the English.  He did not get it.

From January on into the summer of 1676 the war-whoop, the gun-shot and the torch again terrified
the colonies.  Aided by a few allies, King Philip was making his last great effort.  He carried
the war to within twenty miles of Boston.  Of ninety towns in New England, thirteen had been
burned; six hundred buildings had been leveled in smoke, and six hundred arms-bearing colonists
killed.

"These were the most distressing days that New England ever beheld," reads a record.  "All
was fear and consternation.  Few there were, who were not in mourning for some near kindred,
and nothing but horror stared them in the face."

Presently Captain Benjamin Church, as noted in New England as Kit Carson is in the West, was
upon the sachem's trail.  He was a skilled Indian-fighter; he knew King Philip's haunts, and
all the Indian ways.

There was no let-up by Captain Church.  Some captives he turned into scouts, so that they helped
him against their former chief; the more dangerous he shot or hanged.  To the English notion,
these hostile Indians were rebels against the government and deserved no mercy. Other captives,
especially women and children, were sent to the West Indies as slaves.

Soon King Philip's allies began to desert him.  They saw no hope of lasting victory; they accused
King Philip of persuading them into a useless war, and either scattered or went over to the
English.

Among the deserters was Queen Awashonks, squaw sachem of the Sogkonate tribe of the Pokanoket
league.  Her country lay in the southeast corner of Rhode Island.  When Philip had heard that
the Sog-ko-nates were helping Captain Church to trail him down, he is said to have smiled never
again.

Chief Canonchet, great leader of the Narragansetts, was captured and executed.  Thus another
nail was driven into King Philip's fate.

Of Queen Wetamoo's three hundred warriors, twenty-six remained; they were betrayed by one of
their own number, and captured, and Wetamoo was drowned in flight.

These deaths saddened Philip, but the many desertions blackened his horizon and he knew that
he was doomed.

By midsummer he was fleeing from spot to spot, with Captain Church hard after.  He had only
a handful of Pokanokets and scarcely more Narragansetts with him.  Although frequently attacking,
he himself was never sighted.  The English accused him of hiding in cowardly fashion, but he
well knew that with his death or capture the war would be ended. Only the name King Philip
supported it still.

Toward the close of July he had been forced south, to his own Wampanoag country of Mount Hope
and Pocasset.  In a sally north into southern Massachusetts he was surprised, on Sunday, July
30, and his uncle killed and his sister taken prisoner.

The next morning there came in haste from Plymouth the doughty Captain Church, aided by Queen
Awashonks's men.  Where a tree had been felled for a bridge of escape across the Taunton River
thirty miles south of Boston, he espied, on the opposite bank, an Indian sitting alone upon
a stump.

The captain aimed and would have fired, but his Indian companion said: "No.  I think him one
of our own men."  The Indian upon the stump slowly turned his head; the captain saw that he
was King Philip with his hair cut short.

At the fall of the gun hammer King Philip leaped from the stump, and plunging down a steep
bank, was gone.

Captain Church crossed the river in pursuit, but did not catch him.

The next day he came upon the beaten sachem's forlorn camp.  There he captured Philip's wife,
Woo-to-ne-kau-ske, and their little boy of nine years.

The end of King Philip was very near.  His relatives, even his sister-in-law, Wetamoo, had
died; his friends had deserted him; his remaining family were in the hands of his enemies.

"You now have made Philip ready to die, for you have made him as poor and miserable as he used
to make the English," Captain Church's Indian scouts praised.  "You have now killed or taken
all his relations.  This bout has almost broken his heart, and you will soon have his head."

The head of King Philip was indeed the prize.  His escape north was barred by a "great English
army"; his flight southward into Rhode Island was limited by the sea.  His "kenneling places"
(as they were styled perhaps because of the dog's life that he was leading) were constantly
betrayed, and his force of true-hearts was melting like the snows.  But he received no offer
of mercy.  None was sent, and he asked for none.

He doubled and twisted in vain, and tried an ambush.  Captain Church easily side-stepped this;
and with only thirty English and twenty Indian scouts, in two days killed or captured one hundred
and seventy-three more of the Philip people.  Assuredly, King Philip was growing weak.  He
might have listened to terms, but in those stern days terms were not made with rebels, especially
with troublesome Indians who were assumed to be children of Satan.

Captain Church, urged on by the Plymouth government, closed in farther. Now died two of King
Philip's remaining captains.  Sam Barrow, "as noted a rogue as any among the enemy," was captured,
and sentenced at once to death, by Captain Church.  He was an old man, but a hatchet was sunk
into his head.

Chief Totoson, with his eight-year boy and old wife, escaped and reached Agawom, his former
home.  His little son fell sick; his own heart "became a stone within him, and he died."  His
old wife threw some brush and leaves over his body, and soon she, also, died.  Thus was the
Totoson family disposed of.

Only old Annawan, Philip's greatest captain, was left with him.  They two, and their miserable
band of men, women and children, sought last refuge at the abandoned Mount Hope.  Here they
were, back again, defeated, with nowhere else to turn.

On the morning of August 10 Captain Church was home, also, visiting his wife.  He lived on
the island of Rhode Island, in Narragansett Bay and separated by only a narrow strait from
Mount Hope, on the north.

There he had word, in much haste, that one of King Philip's men was waiting, to guide him to
a swamp where the sachem might be killed.

The name of the King Philip man was Alderman, in English.  His brother had proposed to King
Philip that they all surrender, and King Philip had struck him dead.  So revenge burned in
Alderman's heart, and he turned traitor.  He was of the Queen Wetamoo people, but had deserted
her, also.

Upon getting word of King Philip's whereabouts, so near at hand, Captain Church kissed his
wife goodby, and gladly mounted his horse again--hoping, he said, "by tomorrow morning to have
the rogue's head."

This night Alderman guided the captain's force truly.  They had not far to go--only a dozen
or so miles up the Mount Hope peninsula, to the narrow neck.  The captain was well acquainted
with the exact spot: a little isle of dry land in the midst of the swamp.

On the morning of August 12 he had his men arranged silently.  Captain Golding was given the
"honor of beating up Philip's headquarters." With a picked party, crawling on their bellies,
he entered, to surprise the little isle, and drive out the game.

Throughout the swamp the other men were placed, two (a white man and an Indian) by two, behind
trees, "that none might pass undiscovered." When the enemy should be started in flight, then
all the attacking party were to make a great noise.  Every figure moving without noise was
to be fired upon by the ambuscade.

There were not quite enough men to complete the circle of the ambuscade.  However, Captain
Church took his aide, Major Sanford, by the hand, and said: "Sir, I have so placed the men
that it is scarce possible Philip should escape them."  There was no thought of sparing King
Philip's life.  He was an outlaw.

Just as the captain finished his hopeful speech, a gun-shot echoed through the misty gray.
Captain Golding's men had come upon one Indian, and had fired, and then had poured a volley
into the sleeping camp.

Again from the harried band rose the cry "Awannux!  Awannux!  (English! English!)" and into
the swamp they plunged.

Caleb Cook and Alderman the guide had been stationed together behind a tree.  At the first
gun-shot, says the Captain Church story, King Philip "threw his petunk (shot pouch) and powder-horn
over his head, catched up his gun, and ran as fast as he could scamper, without any more clothes
than his small-breeches and stockings."

And here he came, directly for the tree.  The two behind it let him come "fair within shot."
Then Caleb took the first fire upon him.  But the gun only flashed in the pan.  He bade the
Indian fire away, and Alderman did so true to purpose; sent one musket bullet through King
Philip's heart, and another not above two inches from it.  The gun had been loaded with two balls.

King Philip "fell upon his face in the mud and the water, with his gun under him."  He was
dead, at last, on the soil of his long-time home land from which he had sallied to do battle
in vain.

"By this time," reads the Captain Church story, "the enemy perceived that they were waylaid
on the east side of the swamp, and tacked short about.  One of the enemy, who seemed to be
a great, surly old fellow, hallooed with a loud voice, and often called out, 'I-oo-tash, I-oo-tash.'
Captain Church called to his Indian, Peter, and asked him who that was that called so?  He
answered, that it was old Annawan, Philip's great captain, calling on his soldiers to stand
to it and fight stoutly.  Now the enemy finding that place of the swamp which was not ambushed,
many of them made their escape in the English tracks."

When the pursuit had quit, Captain Church let his men know that King Philip had been killed,
and they gave three cheers.

Then the captain ordered the body to be pulled out of the mud.  So some of the Indians "took
hold of him by his stockings, and some by his small breeches (being otherwise naked) and drew
him through the mud to the upland; and a doleful, great, naked, dirty beast he looked like,"
according to their opinion.

"Forasmuch as you have caused many an Englishman's body to be unburied, and to rot above ground,
not one of your bones shall be buried," pronounced Captain Church.  And he ordered an old Indian,
who acted as executioner, to behead and quarter King Philip.

But before he struck with the hatchet, the old Indian also made a little speech, to the body.

"You have been a very great man," he said, "and have made many a man afraid of you; but so
big as you are, I will now chop you up."

And so he did.

King Philip was known not only by his face, but by a mangled hand in which a pistol had burst.
His head and his crippled hand were awarded to Alderman, who had betrayed him; Alderman was
told to exhibit them through New England, if he wished, as a traveling show.  He gained many
shillings in fees.

The four quarters of King Philip were hung to the branches of a tree. The head was stuck upon
a gibbet at Plymouth for twenty years.  The hand was kept at Boston.  Caleb Cook traded with
Alderman for King Philip's gun; and King Philip's wife and little boy were sold as slaves in
the West Indies. 

I am all serene. You won't find I possess either nerves or fear. 'Be sure you are right, and
then go ahead,' is my law."

"Well I'll be confounded!" said the doctor.

In a large hall, peopled with thousands of medical men, the name of
the Harvester was called the following day and his subject was announced.

He arose in his place and began to talk.

"Take the platform," came in a roar from a hundred throats.

The Harvester hesitated.

"You must, David," whispered Carey.

The Harvester made his way forward and was guided through a side door, and a second later calmly
walked down the big stage to the front, and stood at ease looking over his audience, as if to
gauge its size and the pitch to which he should raise his voice. His lean frame loomed every inch
of his six feet, his broad shoulders were square, his clean shaven
face alert and afire.

He wore a spring suit of light gray of good quality and cut, and he was perfect as to details.
"This scarcely seems compatible with my subject," he remarked casually.
"I certainly appear very much in the foreground just at present, but
perhaps that is quite as well. It may be time that I assert myself.
I doubt if there is a man among you who has not handled my products
more or less; you may enjoy learning where and how they are prepared,
and understanding the manner in which my work merges with yours. I
think perhaps the first thing is to paint you as good a word picture
as I can of my geographical location."

Then the Harvester named latitude
and longitude and degrees of temperature. He described the lake, the
marsh, the wooded hill, the swale, and open sunny fields. He spoke
of water, soil, shade, and geographical conditions.

Truly a warrior queen she was, and so she remained to the last, ever loyal to the losing cause
of her grand sachem, and to the memory of Alexander.

With Philip she was driven southward, back toward her home of Pocasset, east of Mount Hope.
By the first week in August of 1676, she had only twenty-six men left, out of her three hundred.

Then there came to the colonists at Taunton, which lay up the river Taunton from Pocasset,
another deserter, with word that he could lead them to the little Wetamoo camp, not far southward.

Twenty armed English descended upon her, August 6, and easily overcame her camp.  She alone
escaped, in flight.  She had no thought of surrendering herself into slavery.

In making her way to Pocasset, she "attempted," reads the tale, "to get over a river or arm
of the sea near by, upon a raft, or some pieces of broken wood; but whether tired and spent
with swimming, or starved with cold and hunger, she was found stark naked in Metapoiset [near
present Swansea of southern Massachusetts, at the Rhode Island line], not far from the water
side, which made some think she was first half drowned; and so ended her wretched life."

No respect was paid to her.  Her head was cut off and hoisted upon a pole in the town of Taunton,
as revenge for the similar beheading of some English bodies, earlier in the war.  When, in
Taunton, the Pocasset captives saw the head--"They made a most horrid and diabolical lamentation,
crying out that it was their queen's head."

Here let us close the melancholy story of the warrior queen Wetamoo, who as the companion-in-arms
of her sachem sought to avenge her husband's death, as well as to save her country from the
foreigner. However, Wetamoo and Philip together dragged the once mighty Narragansetts down.
This brings to the surface the tale of Canonchet, the big-hearted.

The Narragansetts were a large and warlike people, and hard fighters. Their country covered
nearly all present Rhode Island; the city of Providence was founded in their midst, when the
great preacher Roger Williams sought refuge among them.  They conquered other tribes to the
north and west.  When King Philip rose in 1675 they numbered, of themselves, five thousand
people, and could put into the field two thousand warriors.

In the beginning, under their noble sachem Can-on-i-cus, they were friendly to the English
colonists.  While Roger Williams lived among them they stayed friendly.  They agreed to a peace
with Sachem Massasoit's Pokanokets, who occupied the rest of Rhode Island, east across Narragansett
Bay.  They marched with the English and the Mohegans to wipe out the hostile Pequots.

Canonicus died, and Mi-an-to-no-mah, his nephew, who had helped him rule, became chief sachem.
Miantonomah was famed in council and in war.  The colonies suspected him, as they did Alexander,
son of Massasoit.  They favored the Mohegans of the crafty sachem Uncas.  When Miantonomah
had been taken prisoner by Uncas, at the battle of Sachem's Plain in Connecticut, 1643, the
United Colonies of Connecticut, Massachusetts and Plymouth directed that the Mohegans put him
to death, as a treaty breaker.

Accordingly Uncas ordered him killed by the hatchet, and ate a piece of his shoulder.

Possibly Miantonomah deserved to die, but the hearts of the Narragansetts grew very sore.

It is scarcely to be wondered at that they favored the Pokanokets rather than the English,
when King Philip, who also had suffered, called upon them to aid in cleaning the land of the
white enemy. "Brothers, we must be as one, as the English are, or we shall soon all be destroyed,"
had said Miantonomah, in a speech to a distant tribe; and that looked to be so.

Ca-non-chet, whose name in Indian was Qua-non-chet (pronounced the same), and Nan-un-te-noo,
was son of the celebrated Miantonomah.  He was now chief sachem of the Narragansetts, and the
friend of King Philip.

He was a tall, strongly built man, and accused by the English of being haughty and insolent.
Why not?  He was of proud Narragansett blood, from the veins of a long line of great chiefs,
and the English had given his father into the eager hands of the enemy.

Presently, he was asked to sign treaties that would make him false to the memory of Miantonomah
and double-hearted toward the hopeful King Philip.

The papers engaged the Narragansetts not to harbor any of King Philip's people, nor to help
them in any way against the English, nor to enter a war without the permission of the English.
He was to deliver the Philip and Wetamoo people, when they came to him.

Canonchet was not that kind of a man.  He had no idea of betraying people who may have fled
to him for shelter from a common enemy.  A few of his men feared.  It was suggested to him
that he yield to the colonies, lest the Narragansetts be swallowed up by the English.  He replied
like a chief, and the son of Miantonomah.

The venerable Roger Williams, his friend, the friend of his father and the friend of the long-dead
Canonicus, had advised him to stay out of the war.

"Massachusetts," said Roger Williams, "can raise thousands of men at this moment; and if you
kill them, the king of England will supply their place as fast as they fall."

"It is well," replied Canonchet.  "Let them come.  We are ready for them.  But as for you,
Brother Williams, you are a good man; you have been kind to us many years.  We shall burn the
English in their houses, but not a hair of your head shall be touched."

The colonies did not wait for Canonchet to surrender the King Philip people.  The treaty had
been signed on October 28, and on November 2 an army from Connecticut, Massachusetts and Plymouth
was ordered out, to march against the Narragansetts, and seize King Philip and Queen Wetamoo,
and punish Canonchet.

It was known that Queen Wetamoo was with Canonchet, but not certainly that King Philip had
"kenneled" there.  At any rate, down marched the English, their Mohegan and Pequot allies,
all piloted by one Peter who might have been the husband of Wetamoo herself, but who probably
was a Narragansett traitor.

Canonchet stood firm.  To his notion, he was not obliged to surrender anybody, while the English
held his brother and three other Narragansetts.  Besides--"Deliver the Indians of Philip? 
No!  Not the paring of a Wampanoag's nail!"

On the afternoon of December 19, this year 1675, the bold English and their allies struck the
great fortified village at Sunke-Squaw.  Out from the heat and smudge of the blazing wigwams
fled Philip and Wetamoo and Canonchet, with their shrieking people, into the wintry swamp where
the snowy branches of the cedars and hemlocks were their only refuge. Canonchet had lost a
third of his nation; large numbers surrendered to the English; but, like his friend Philip,
with his warriors who remained true he carried the war to the English themselves.  And a terrible
war it was.

In March Captain William Peirse was sent out with seventy stout men to march from Plymouth
and head off the raging Narragansetts.  Plymouth had heard that the haughty young sachem Canonchet
was on his way to Plymouth, at the van of three hundred warriors.

Captain Peirse made his will and marched southward, to the Pawtucket River not far above Providence.
Canonchet's spies had marked him, and Canonchet was ready.

On March 26, which was a Sunday, Captain Peirse saw upon the other side of the river a party
of Indians limping as if worn out and trying to get away.  Therefore he crossed, near the Pawtucket
Falls, in glad pursuit--and "no sooner was he upon the western side, than the warriors of Nanuntenoo,
like an avalanche from a mountain, rushed down upon him; nor striving for coverts from which
to fight, more than their foes, fought them face to face with the most determined bravery!"

There were Narragansetts still upon the east side of the river, also, to cut off retreat. 
The captain, fighting desperately, with his men ranged in two ranks back to back, sent a runner
to Providence, only six or eight miles, for assistance; but so quickly was the work done, by
Canonchet, that of all the English force, only one Englishman escaped, and not above a dozen
of the scouts.

"Captain Peirse was slain, and forty and nine English with him, and eight (or more) Indians
who did assist the English."

Canonchet lost one hundred and forty, but it was a great victory, well planned and well executed.
Captain Peirse had been a leader in the storming of the Narragansett fort at Sunke-Squaw, the
last winter; that is one reason why the Canonchet warriors fought so ravenously, to take revenge.

On the day after the dreadful battle, from Connecticut, southwest, there marched a larger force
of English and friendly Indians, to close the red trail of the Sachem Canonchet.  He was feared
as much as King Philip was feared.

Canonchet did not proceed against Plymouth.  With thirty volunteers he had set out south for
the Mount Hope region itself, in order to gather seed corn.  The abandoned fields of the English
along the Connecticut River waited.  They ought to be planted to Indian corn.

On his way back to the Connecticut River with his seed corn, near the close of the first week
in April he made camp almost upon the very battle ground above Providence, where yet the soil
was stained by the blood of March 26.

He did not know that now the enemy were upon his trail indeed; but at the moment a company
of fifty English under Captain George Denison of Southerton, Connecticut, and eighty Indians--the
Mohegans led by Chief Oneka, son of Uncas, the Pequots by Cas-sa-sin-na-mon, the Niantics (formerly
allies of the Narragansetts) by Cat-a-pa-zet--were drawing near.

Three other companies were in the neighborhood.

This day Canonchet was lying in his blanket, telling to a party of seven warriors the story
of the battleground.  The other warriors were scattered through the forest.  Two sentries had
been placed upon a hill.

Not far away the Captain Denison party already had killed one warrior, and had seized two old
squaws.  The squaws confessed that Nanuntenoo was yonder, the Indian scouts picked up the fresh
trail, the Denison men hastened at best speed.

In the midst of his story, Canonchet saw his two sentinels dash headlong past the wigwam, "as
if they wanted for time to tell what they had seen."  At once he sent a third man, to report
upon what was the matter.  This third man likewise suddenly made off at full pace, without
a word.  Then two more he sent; of these, one, returning breathless, paused long enough to
say that "all the English army was upon him!"

"Whereupon, having no time to consult, and but little time to attempt an escape, and no means
to defend himself, he began to fly with all speed.  Running with great swiftness around the
hill, to get out of sight upon the opposite side, he was distinguished by his wary pursuers,"
and they were hot after him.

In fact, running hard around the hill, Canonchet wellnigh ran into the Niantics of Chief Catapazet,
who were coming down right over the hill. He swerved, at the view-halloo, and lengthened his
stride.  Some of the English had joined the chase.  Canonchet tore like a deer for the river.

They had not recognized him, for he was wearing his blanket.  But so hotly they pressed him,
that he needs must cast aside his blanket. This revealed to them his fine lace-embroidered
coat, which had been given to him as a bribe, at Boston last October.  Now they knew that he
was a chief, and a personage, and they yelled louder, and ran faster.

Presently Canonchet stripped off his lacy coat, and dropped it.  And soon loosening his belt
of wampum, he dropped that also.  By this chief's belt they knew that he was the great Canonchet,
and faster still they ran.

However, he was out-footing all except one Indian.  That Indian was a Pequot named Monopoide--the
best runner of all, and better than Canonchet himself.

With only a single pursuer to be feared, Canonchet turned sharply and leaped into the river,
to cross by a strange trail.  As he splashed through, wading find plunging, seeing escape close
before him if he could gain the opposite bank, he stumbled upon a stone.  Falling forward he
not only lost valuable time but soused his gun.

"At that accident," he afterward said, "my heart and bowels turned within me so that I became
like a rotten stick, void of strength." 

All you needed to a-done was to take her in your arms, and make her your wife, and she'd 'a' waked
up to what you meant by love."

"But suppose she never awakened?"

"Aw, bosh! S'pose water won't
wet! S'pose fire won't burn! S'pose the sun won't shine!  Canonchet was both, and might yet have
fought loose, to liberty.  But he had made up his mind to quit.  He offered no trouble; the
guns of the pursuing party were covering him again, and he obeyed the orders.

He did not break his silence until young Robert Staunton, first of the English to reach him,
asked him questions.  This was contrary to Indian usage.  Canonchet looked upon him disdainfully.

"You much child.  No understand matters of war, Let your brother or chief come; him I will answer."

Robert's brother, John Staunton, was captain of one of the Connecticut companies that had been
sent out to find the Narragansetts; but Canonchet was now turned over to Captain Denison.

He was offered his life if he would help the English.  This brought from him a glare of rebuke.

He was offered his life if he would send orders to his people to make peace.

"Say no more about that," he replied.  "I will not talk of peace.  I do not care to talk at
all.  I was born a sachem.  If sachems come to speak with me, I will answer; but none present
being such, I am obliged, in honor to myself, to hold my tongue."

"If you do not accept the terms offered to you, you will be put to death."

"Killing me will not end the war.  There are two thousand men who will revenge me."

"You richly deserve death.  You can expect no mercy.  You have said that you would burn the
English in their houses.  You have boasted that you would not deliver up a single Wampanoag,
nor the paring of a Wampanoag's nail."

"I desire to hear no more about it," replied Canonchet.  "Others were as eager in the war as
myself, and many will be found of the same mind. Have not the English burned my people in their
houses?  Did you ever deliver up to the Narragansetts any of the Narragansetts' enemies?  Why
then should I deliver up to them the Wampanoags?  I would rather die than remain prisoner.
You have one of equal rank here with myself.  He is Oneka, son of Uncas.  His father killed
my father.  Let Oneka kill me.  He is a sachem."

"You must die."

"I like it well.  I shall die before my heart is soft, or I have said anything of which Canonchet
shall be ashamed."

Even his enemies admired him.  The English compared him to some old Roman.

He was not killed here.  Forty-three of his people, men and women, had been taken by the troops
and scouts; a number of these were given over to death by the scout Indians.  But Canonchet
was borne in triumph to Stonington, Connecticut.

In order to reward the friendly Indians, the Pequots were permitted to shoot him, the Mohegans
to behead and to quarter him, the Niantics to burn him.  As a return favor, the Indians presented
the head of Canonchet, or Nanuntenoo, to the English council at Hartford, Connecticut.

In the above fashion perished, without a plea, "in the prime of his manhood," Canonchet of
the Big Heart, last Grand Sachem of the Narragansetts.  Presently only the name of his nation
remained.

The Hurons, styled in English Wyandots, fled clear into Michigan and spread down into northern
Ohio.

Of the Algonkins there were three nations who clung together as the Council of the Three Fires.
These were the Ottawas, the Ojibwas and the Potawatomis.

The Ottawas were known as the "Trade People" and the "Raised Hairs." They had claimed the River
Ottawa, in which was the Allumette Island upon which Piskaret and the Adirondacks had lived.

The Ojibways were known as the "Puckered Moccasin People," from the words meaning "to roast
till puckered up."  Their tanned moccasins had a heavy puckered seam.  The name Ojibwa, rapidly
pronounced, became in English "Chippeway."  As Chippeways and Chippewas have they remained.

The Potawatomis, whose name is spelled also Pottawattamis, were known as the "Nation of Fire."
They had lived the farthest westward of all, until the Sioux met them and forced them back.

The Ottawas were recorded by the early French as rude and barbarous. The Chippewas, or Ojibwas,
were recorded as skillful hunters and brave warriors.  The Potawatomis were recorded as the
most friendly and kind-hearted among the northern Indians.

Of these people many still exist, in Canada and the United States.

When England, aided by her American colonies, began to oppose France in the New World in 1755,
the Three Fires helped the French.  They were then holding part of present Wisconsin and all
of Michigan.

Now in the fall of 1760 France had lost Canada.  She was about to surrender to England all
her forts and trading posts of the Upper Mississippi basin, from the Great Lakes to the Ohio River.

In November Major Robert Rogers, a noted American Ranger, of New Hampshire birth, with two
hundred hardy American woodsmen in twelve whaleboats, and with a herd of fat cattle following
the shores, was on his way from Montreal, by water, to carry the English tongue and the British
flag to the French posts of the Great Lakes.

He had passed several posts, and was swinging around for Detroit, when a storm of sleet and
rain kept him in camp amidst the thick timber where today stands the city of Cleveland, Ohio.

Here he was met by a party of Indians from the west, bearing a message.

"You must go no farther," they said, "Pontiac is coming.  He is the king and lord of this country
you are in.  Wait till he can see you with his own eyes."

That same day in the afternoon Chief Pontiac himself appeared.  Major Rogers saw a dark, medium
tall but very powerful Indian, aged near fifty years, wearing not only richly embroidered clothes
but also "an air of majesty and princely grandeur."

Pontiac spoke like a great chief and ruler.

"I have come to find out what you are doing in this place, and how you dare to pass through
my country without my permission."

Major Rogers replied smoothly.

"I have no design against you or your people.  I am here by orders from your new English fathers,
to remove the French from your country, so that we may trade in peace together."

And he gave the chief a pledge of wampum.  Pontiac returned another belt.

"I shall stand in the path you are walking, till morning," was all that he would say; and closed
the matter for the night.

During the storm of the next few days he smoked the pipe of peace with the major, and promised
safe passage for him, to Detroit.

Thus Major Rogers was the first of the English Americans to be face to face with one of the
master minds of the Indian Americans.

This Pontiac was head chief not alone of the Ottawas, but of the Chippewas and Potawatomis.
Rumor has declared that he was born a dark Catawba of that fierce fighting nation in South
Carolina, who frequently journeyed north to fall upon the northern tribes.  But his father
probably was an Ottawa, his mother an Ojibwa.

By reason of his strong mind, and his generalship in peace and in war, he was accepted as a
leader throughout all the Great Lakes country. The name and fame of Pontiac had extended far
into the south and into the east.  It is said that he commanded the whole Indian force at the
bloody Braddock's Field south of Pittsburg, when on July 9, 1755, the British regulars of General
Sir William Braddock, aided by the colonial militia of Major George Washington, were crushed
and scattered by the French and Indians.

Before that he had saved the French garrison of Detroit from an attack by hostile Foxes. 

Come on!"
"One minute," said the doctor. "David, I am making up a list of friends
to whom I am going to send programmes of the medical meeting, and
I thought your wife might like to see you among the speakers, and
your subject. What is her address?"  He astonished
the major by his shrewd questions--as to how the English waged war, how their clothing was
made, how they got iron from the ground, for their weapons.

He even stated that he was willing to form an alliance with the king of England and to call
him uncle; but that he must be allowed to reign as he pleased in his own country, or "he would
shut up the way and keep the English out."

Puzzled and stung by the news that their fathers, the French, had been beaten in war, a great
number of Ottawas, Potawatomis, Chippewas, Sacs and Wyandots gathered at old Detroit, to witness
the surrender.  They could not understand why the French should march out and lay down their
arms to such a small company of English.  Evidently these English were gifted with powers that
made their enemies weak.

For a brief space all went well, while the Indians of Pontiac's country watched, to see what
kind of men these English should prove to be.

But the name of the English already was bad.  These Northern tribes well knew what had occurred
in Virginia and in New England.  The Powatans, the Pokanokets, the Narragansetts and other
peoples had been wiped out, their lands seized.  The English were bent upon being masters,
not allies.

There was found to be a great difference in the methods of the French, and these English.

The French treated chiefs as equals, and tribes as brothers and children; lived in their lodges,
ate of their food, created good feeling by distributing presents, interfered little with ancient
customs, traded fairly, and forebade whiskey.

The English despised the Indians, lived apart, demanded rather than asked, were stingy in trading,
and cheated by means of liquor.

"When the Indians visited the forts, instead of being treated with attention and politeness,
they were received gruffly, subjected to indignities, and not infrequently helped out of the
fort with the butt of a sentry's musket or a vigorous kick from an officer."

Pontiac and his people soon saw this.  The French-Canadian traders still at large took pains
to whisper, in cunning fashion, that the great French king was old and had been asleep while
the English were arming; but that now he had awakened, and his young men were coming to rescue
his red children.  A fleet of great canoes was on its way up the St. Lawrence River, to capture
the Lakes, and the French and the Indians would again live together!

The Three Fires and their allies the Sacs and the Wyandots longed for the pleasant company
of their French brothers.  In his village on the Canada border just across the river from Detroit,
Pontiac watched these "Red Coats" for two years and found, as he thought, nothing good in them
or their cheating traders and he resolved to be rid of them all.

With the eye of a chief and a warrior he had noted, also, that they were a foolish people.
As if despising the power of the Indian, they garrisoned their posts with only small forces,
although many of these posts were lonely spots, far separated by leagues of water and forest
from any outside aid.  Messages from one to another could be easily stopped.

The French were being allowed to remain and to move about freely.  The peace treaty between
the French and the English had not yet been signed.  No doubt the French would join the Indians
in driving the invaders from this country so rich in corn and fish and game.

Out of his brooding and his hate, Pontiac formed his plan.  It was a plan like the plan of
Opechancanough and King Philip, but on a larger scale.  He worked at it alone, until he was
prepared to set it in motion.

Then, late in the year 1762, he sent to the eastward his runners bearing to the Senecas a red-stained
tomahawk and a Bloody Belt.

They carried the message:

"The English mean to make slaves of us, by occupying so many posts in our country.  Let us
try now, to recover our liberty, rather than wait until they are stronger."

From the Senecas the Bloody Belt was passed to the Delawares of western New York and eastern
Pennsylvania; from the Delawares to the Shawnees of western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio;
from the Shawnees it was passed westward to the Miamis, and the Wyandots of Indiana.

Several thousands of miles had the Bloody Belt traveled, when in March, of 1763, it was caught
and stopped by Ensign Holmes, the young commander at old Fort Miami near the present city of
Fort Wayne, Indiana.

He sent it back to Detroit, far northward, with a note of warning for Major Gladwyn the commander.
He believed that with the stoppage of the belt he had checked the plan.  Major Gladwyn, in
turn, reported to his superiors that this "was a trifling matter which would blow over."

The belt may have been stopped, but not the word of Pontiac.  It traveled on, until from Lake
Superior of the Canada border down to Kentucky all the tribes between the Alleghanies and the
Mississippi River were only waiting for the Day.

Vague rumors brought in by traders and friendly scouts floated hither-thither--rumors of mysterious
remarks, of secret councils, of a collecting of arms and powder, and a sharpening of knives
and hatchets, even among tribes remote from the posts.

But the garrisons were not reinforced.  The soldiers idled and joked, the Indians came and
went as usual, gates were not closed except at night.

A Delaware prophet was reported to be preaching death to the Red Coats. Unrest seethed, and
yet could not be traced to any source.  On April 27, unknown to a single one of the English
at the Great Lakes, a hundred strange chiefs gathered within a few miles of Detroit itself,
to confer with Pontiac.

In the midst of the forest he addressed them.  Here, seated in a large circle, were Ottawas,
Ojibwas, Sacs, Potawatomis, Wyandots, Senecas, Miamis, Shawnees, Foxes, Delawares, Menominis--all
intent for the words of Pontiac.

His speech was full of fire and eloquence.  He was an orator.  He reminded his brothers of
their treatment by the English, and of their better treatment by the French--their friends
who had been ousted.  He told them that now was the time to rise, when the war canoes of their
French father were on the way to re-people the land with happiness.

A prophet had been born among the Delawares, said Pontiac.  The Great Spirit had appeared to
this prophet in a dream, and had demanded why the Indians suffered the white strangers to live
in this land that he had provided with everything for the Indian's use.

Let the Indians return to the customs of their ancestors--fling away the blankets, the coats,
the guns, the fire-water, and use again the skins, the bows, and the native foods, and be independent.
"As for these English, these dogs dressed in red, drive them from your hunting grounds; drive
them!  And then when you are in distress, I will help you."

The day was named by Pontiac.  It should date from the change of the moon, in the next month
(or about May 7).  At that time should begin the work, by all the tribes, of seizing every
English fort and trading post in the Great Lakes country and west of the Alleghany Mountains.
The tribes nearest to each should attend to the matter--strike when they heard that he had
struck Detroit.

The date and the plan were approved.  The council broke up.  As silently as they had come,
the chiefs went home; some by water, some afoot, and no white man knew of the meeting!

Detroit was the largest and most important of the English posts. Pontiac himself would seize
this by aid of his Ottawas, some Potawatomis and Wyandots.  To the Chippewas and the Sacs was
given over the next important fur-trade station, that of Mich-il-i-mac-ki-nac, north.  It enclosed
a church and eighty or one hundred houses, mainly of French settlers with a sprinkling of English
traders.

In the block-houses at the corners and protecting the gates, light cannon were mounted.  The
garrison consisted of only one hundred and twenty men of the Eightieth Foot.  In the village
there were perhaps forty other men.

On both sides of the river lay the fertile farms of the French settlers.  Back of the farms
on the east or Canadian side, and about five miles from Detroit, was the teeming village of
Pontiac's Ottawas. Potawatomis and Wyandots also lived near.  At Pontiac's call there waited
more than a thousand warriors.

The set time approached.  On May 1 Pontiac and forty chiefs and warriors entered the fort,
and danced the calumet, a peace dance, for the pleasure of their officers.  Pontiac said to
Major Gladwyn that he would return, at the change of the moon, May 7, or in one week, to hold
a council with him, and "brighten the chain of peace with the English."

The major agreed.  He was a very foolish man, for a chief.  Having returned to his village,
Pontiac called a different kind of a council, there--a war council of one hundred chiefs. 
They were to have their people cut off the ends of muskets that should be carried concealed
under the blankets.  Sixty chiefs and warriors should go with him into the council chamber
at the fort; the others should linger in the streets of the town and at the fort gates.

He would speak to the major with a belt, white on the one side, green on the other.  When he
turned the belt and presented it wrong end first, let every warrior kill an English soldier,
beginning with the officers.  At the sound let every warrior outside the council use gun and
hatchet.

On May 5 a French settler's wife crossed the river to buy maple-sugar and deer-meat at the
Ottawa village.  She saw the warriors busy filing at their gun-barrels--shortening the guns
to scarce a yard of length. This was a curious thing to do.  When she went back to the post
she spoke about it.

"That," said the blacksmith, "explains why those fellows have been borrowing all my files and
hack-saws.  They wouldn't tell me what for. Something's brewing."

When Major Gladwyn was informed, still he would not believe.  But the fur-traders at the post
insisted that when an Indian shortened his gun, he meant mischief.  The opinion of fur-traders
carried no weight with Major Gladwyn, the British officer.

The next evening Catharine, a pretty Ojibwa girl who lived with the Potawatomis, came to see
him in his quarters.  She was his favorite. She had agreed to make him a pair of handsome moccasins,
from an elk hide.  Now she brought the moccasins, and the rest of the hide.

Usually she had been much pleased to look upon and talk with the handsome young major in the
red clothes.  This time her face was clouded, she hung her head, and spoke hardly at all. 
Her eager girlishness had vanished.  The major's delight with the moccasins failed to cheer her up.

Trying to win her smiles, he told her the moccasins were so beautiful that he wished to give
them to a friend.  Would she take the elk-hide away with her, and make another pair of moccasins
for himself!

She finally left, with strangely slow step, and backward glances.  At sunset, when the gates
of the fort were to be closed, the guard found her still inside.  As she would not go, the
sergeant took word to the major.

"She won't talk with me, sir," he reported.

"Send her in and I will talk with her," ordered the major.

Catharine came, downcast, silent, and timid.

"Why have you not gone before the gates are shut, Catharine?"

She hesitated.

"I did not wish to take away the skin that is yours."

"But you did take it away, as far as the gate."

She hesitated more.

"Yes, that is so.  But if I take it outside I can never return it."

"Why not?"

"I cannot tell.  I am afraid."

"You can talk freely.  Nothing that you say shall go to other ears.  If you bring me news of
value you will be well rewarded, and no one shall know."

Catharine loved the major.  Presently she told him of the mind of Pontiac, and the deed planned
for tomorrow morning.

A cold fear clutched the heart of Major Gladwyn.  He recalled the shortened guns, he recalled
the Bloody Belt, he recalled the date made with him for a big council on the morrow.  At last
he rather believed.

So he sent away the trembling Catharine, that she might go to her village.  He held a council
with his officers.

Here they were, with only one hundred and twenty soldiers, and less than three weeks' provisions,
cut off by one thousand, two thousand, three thousand merciless Indian warriors, and by the
French settlers and traders who probably would be glad to have the English killed.

"The English are to be struck down, but no Frenchman is to be harmed," had said Catharine.

That looked bad indeed.

This night guards were doubled along the parapets, and in the block-houses.  The major himself
walked guard most of the night.  From the distant villages of the Ottawas, the Wyandots, and
the Potawatomis drifted the clamor of dances--an ugly sound, full of meaning, now.

Precisely at ten o'clock in the morning a host of bark canoes from the Ottawa side of the Detroit
River slanted across the current, and made landing.  Pontiac approached at the head of a long
file of thirty chiefs and as many warriors.  They walked with measured, stately tread. Every
man was closely wrapped in a gay blanket.

They were admitted through the gate of the fort, but it was closed against the mass of warriors,
women and children who pressed after.

As Pontiac, with his escort, stalked for the council room, his quick glances saw that the soldiers
were formed, under arms, and moving from spot to spot, and that a double rank had been stationed
around the headquarters.

In the council chamber he noted, too, that each officer wore his sword, and two pistols!

"Why," asked Pontiac, of Major Gladwyn, "do I see so many of my father's young men standing
in the street with their guns?"

"It is best that my young men be exercised as soldiers, or they will grow lazy and forget,"
answered the major.

Ha!  Pontiac knew.  Somehow his plans had been betrayed; his game was up, unless he chose an
open fight.

His chiefs and warriors sat uneasily.  They all feared death.  By Indian law they ought to
be killed for having intended to shed blood in a calumet council.

Pontiac started his talk.  He acted confused, as though he was not certain what course to pursue.

Once he did seem about to offer the belt wrong end first, as the signal--and Major Gladwyn,
still sitting, slightly raised his hand. Instantly from outside the door sounded the clash
of arms and the quick roll of a drum, to show that the garrison was on the alert.  The officers
half drew their swords.

Pontiac flushed yet darker.  He stammered, and offering the belt right end first, closed his
talk, and sat down again.

Major Gladwyn made a short reply.  He said that the English were glad to be friends, as long
as their red brothers deserved it; but any act of war would be severely punished.

That was all.  The major let the Indians file out again.  Pontiac knew.

He was too great a leader, in the Indian way, to be balked by one defeat.  He actually proposed
another council; he actually persuaded the foolish major to send out to him two officers, for
a peace talk. One of the officers barely escaped from captivity, the other never came back.

Then Pontiac boldly besieged Detroit, in white race fashion--the closest, longest siege ever
laid by Indians against any fort on American soil.

His two thousand Indians swarmed in the forest, held the fences and walls and buildings of
the fields, peppered the palisade with bullets and arrows, shot fire into the town; captured
a supply fleet in the river, ambushed sallying parties, cut to pieces a column of reinforcements.

The siege lasted six months.  The orders to attack went out.  On May 16 Fort Sandusky, at Lake
Erie in northern Ohio, was seized by the Wyandots and Ottawas, during a council.

On May 25, Fort St. Joseph of St. Joseph, Michigan, on Lake Michigan across the state from
Detroit, was seized in like manner by the Potawatomis.  On May 27, Fort Miami, near present
Fort Wayne of Indiana, commanded by Ensign Holmes who had discovered the Bloody Belt, was forced
to surrender to the Wyandots.  Ensign Holmes himself was decoyed into the open, and killed.

On June 4, populous Michilimackinac of northern Michigan was pillaged. The Chippewas and Sacs
celebrated the King's Birthday, in honor of the English, with a great game of lacrosse in front
of the post. Michilimackinac did not know that Detroit was being besieged!  The gates were
left open, the officers gathered to witness the game.  The ball was knocked inside the palisades,
the players rushed after--and that was the end of Michilimackinac.

On June 15 the little fort of Presq' Isle, near the modern city of Erie on the Lake Erie shore
of northern Pennsylvania, was attacked.  It was captured in two days, by the Ottawas and Potawatomis
from Detroit.

On June 18, Fort Le Boeuf, twelve miles south of it, was burned.  Just when Fort Venango, farther
south, fell to the Senecas, no word says, for not a man of it remained alive.  June 1, Fort
Ouatanon, below Lafayette on the Wabash River in west central Indiana, had surrendered.

Niagara in the east was threatened; Fort Legonier, forty miles southeast of Pittsburg in Pennsylvania,
was attacked by the Delawares and Shawnees, but held out; the strong Fort Pitt (now Pittsburg),
with garrison of over three hundred soldiers and woodsmen, was besieged by the united Delawares,
Shawnees, Wyandots and Mingo Iroquois.

A second Bloody Belt had been dispatched by Pontiac from Detroit; as fast as it arrived, the
allies struck hard.  Of twelve fortified English posts, eight fell.  Not only that, but the
fiery spirit of Pontiac had aroused twenty-two tribes extending from Canada to Virginia, and
from New York to the Illinois.  A hundred English traders were murdered in camp, and on the
trail.  A thousand English are supposed to have been killed.  Five hundred families of northern
Virginia and of western Maryland fled for their lives.

While this work was going on, and the frontier settlements shuddered, and feared the morrow,
Pontiac was sternly sticking to his siege of Fort Detroit.

The French around there complained to him that his men were robbing them of provisions, and
injuring the corn-fields.

"You must stand that," rebuked Pontiac.  "I am fighting your battles against the English."

He gave out receipts, for the supplies as taken.  These receipts were pieces of bark, pictured
with the kind of supplies taken, and signed with the figure of an otter--the totem of the Ottawas.
After the war every receipt was honored, by payment.

Only his Ottawas were still fighting Detroit, when on October 30, this 1763, there arrived,
from the French commander on the lower Mississippi, a peace belt and a messenger for Pontiac.

He had been told that peace had been declared between the French and the English, but he had
not believed.  Now he was told again, by word direct, that the king of France and the king
of England had signed peace papers; the country was English, his father the king of France
could not help him.  He must stop his war, and "take the English by the hand."

Weeks before this, the Indians to the south had withdrawn; his other allies were fading into
the forest.  So, sullen and disappointed, he, too, withdrew.  His sun had set, but he tried
to follow it southwestward.

Before he gave his hand to the English he did attempt another war.  The tribes of the Illinois
hesitated, in council.

"If you do not join my people," thundered Pontiac, "I will consume you as the fire eats the
dry grass of the prairies!"

The plot failed, but the Illinois did not forget his insulting words. In April, 1769, while
leaving a council with the Illinois beside the Mississippi River, and wearing a blue-and-silver
uniform coat given to him years before by the brave General Montcalm of the French, he was
murdered by a Kaskaskia of the Illinois nation, in the forest which became East St. Louis.

The Kaskaskia had been bribed by an English trader, with a barrel of whiskey, to do the deed.
There died Pontiac.  He was buried, it is said, on the site of the present Southern Hotel in
St. Louis City.

The Illinois suffered from this foul crime.  All of Pontiac's loyal people--the Ottawas, the
Potawatomis, the Sacs, the Foxes, the Chippewas--rose against them and swept them from the
face of the earth.

Now what of Catharine, who saved Detroit from Pontiac?  She saved Detroit, but Fort Detroit
did not save her.  Pontiac was no fool; he very quickly had suspected her.  He well knew that
Major Gladwyn was her friend, and that she had taken the moccasins in to him.

She was seized by the chief, beaten almost lifeless with a lacrosse racquet, and condemned
to the meanest of labor.  After the siege, Major Gladwyn made no effort to rescue her or reward
her.  At last, when an old and miserable woman, she fell into a kettle of boiling maple sap,
and died.  His name was the English one of John Logan.  He was a Mingo, or Iroquois, of a Cayuga
band that had drifted south into east central Pennsylvania.

There Chief Shikellemus, his father, had settled and had proved himself a firm friend of the
whites.  Old Shikellemus invited the Moravian missionaries to take refuge on his lands.  He
spoke good English.  He acted as agent between his people and the Province of Pennsylvania.
He was hospitable and shrewd, and ever refused to touch liquor because, as he said, he "did
not wish to become a fool."

His house was elevated on stilts, as protection against the "big drunks."

About 1725, a second son was born to him and his wife, and named Tah-gah-jute, meaning "His-eye-lashes-stick-out,"
or, "Open-eyes."  In admiration of his good friend James Logan, of Philadelphia, secretary
of Pennsylvania, and sometimes acting governor, Chief Shikellemus gave little Tah-gah-jute
the English name of Logan.

As "John Logan" he was known to the settlers.

The wise and upright Shikellemus died--"in the fear of the Lord."  His people scattered wider.
Logan his son moved westward, to the Shawnee and Delaware country of Pennsylvania.

Here he married a Shawnee girl.  He set up housekeeping and traded venison and skins with the
white settlers, for powder, ball, and sugar and flour.

The tide of white blood was surging ever farther into the west, and the Indians' hunting grounds.
Many of the Indians grew uneasy.  Pontiac's Bloody Belt passed from village to village, but
the weary and nervous traveler was always welcome at the cabin of Logan, "friend of the white man."

A white hunter, Brown, trailing bear in the Pennsylvania timber, laid aside his rifle and stooped
to drink at a spring.  Suddenly he saw mirrored in the clear water the tall figure of an armed
Indian, watching him.  Up he sprang, leaped for his gun, leveled it--but the Indian smiled,
knocked the priming from his own gun, and extended his hand.

This was Logan--"the best specimen of humanity I ever met with, red or white," wrote Brown.
"He could speak a little English, and told me there was another white hunter a little way down
the stream, and guided me to his camp."

Other stories of Logan's kindnesses to the whites in his country are told.  In the latter part
of 1763, a party of white settlers had broken in upon the refuge of twenty Conestoga Iroquois,
in southern Pennsylvania, and killed every one.  The Conestogas were kin to the other Mingos;
but Logan made no war talk about it.

Simon Kenton, one of the most famous scouts of Daniel Boone's time in Kentucky and Ohio, says
that his form was "striking and manly," his countenance "calm and noble."

Although Logan started out to walk the straight path of peace, sore days were ahead of him.
He moved westward again in 1770, erected a cabin at the mouth of Beaver Creek, on the Ohio
side of the Ohio River about half way between Pittsburg of Pennsylvania and Wheeling of West
Virginia.

His cabin was kept wide open.  Everybody spoke well of Logan.  He removed once more.  The new
cabin, "home of the white man," was built on the Sciota River of central Ohio, among the Shawnees
of Chief Cornstalk's tribe.  He and Chief Cornstalk were close friends.  They both stood out
for peace.  But Cornstalk had been a war chief also, during the Pontiac up-rising.  He and
his warriors had obeyed the Bloody Belt.  His name, Cornstalk, meant that he was the support
of the Shawnee nation.

Now the evil days of Logan were close at hand.

Since the treaty signed with the twenty-two tribes of Pontiac, in 1765, there had been general
peace between the red men and the white men in America.  This peace was not to continue.

For instance, Bald Eagle, a friendly old Delaware chief, who frequently came in, by canoe,
to trade for tobacco and sugar, was killed, without cause, by three white men, in southern
Pennsylvania.  They propped him, sitting, in the stern of his canoe, thrust a piece of journey-cake,
or corn-bread, into his mouth, and set him afloat down the stream.  Many settlers who knew
him well saw him pass and wondered why he did not stop for a visit.  Finally he was found to
be dead, and was brought ashore for burial.

There were bad Indians, too, who murdered and stole.  For this, the good Indians suffered.
Western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio were a wild and lawless country.

Up to 1774 these tit-for-tats had not brought on war.  But the French of Canada and the Great
Lakes country still secretly urged the Indians to drive out the settlers.  The Americans were
becoming annoyed by the harsh laws of the English king.  There were English officials who desired
an Indian war.  That would give the Colonists something else to think about.

Lord Dunmore, royal governor of Virginia, was one of these officials. He had claim to land
extending into Pennsylvania; Fort Pitt, at present Pittsburg, was garrisoned by Virginia troops,
and he wanted to keep them there, to help his land schemes.

April 25, 1774, he issued a proclamation calling upon the commander at Fort Pitt to be ready
to repel the Indians.  The commander called on the border settlers.

There was great excitement.  Almost at once the peace chain that Logan had received from his
father Shikellemus was broken.  He and his wife and relatives, and a number of Shawnees and
Delawares, were encamped along Yellow Creek.  This emptied into the Ohio River a few miles
below Beaver Creek, his former home.

On the very day after the commander at Fort Pitt had issued his notice to the border people
to arm, from Wheeling, on the Ohio in West Virginia, Captain Michael Cresap led a party of
militia and frontiersmen to hunt Indians.

They promptly killed two friendly Shawnees at Pipe Creek, fourteen miles below Wheeling.  The
Shawnees had no time in which to make resistance.  The next Indians who were attacked, fired
back; one white man was wounded.  Among the Indians killed in these two meetings was a relative
of Logan.

Captain Cresap started north to wipe out Chief Logan's camp.  He well knew that as soon as
the word of the killings reached the camp, trouble might break.  On the way his heart failed
him.  He was a hot-headed man, he hated Indians--but he balked at shooting women and children.
So he turned aside, with his party.

There were white men not so particular as he.  On Baker's Bottom, opposite the mouth of Yellow
Creek, lived Joshua Baker, whose principal business was that of selling rum to the Indians.
In the same settlement lived Daniel Greathouse--"a ruffian in human shape," and an enemy to
all Indians.

Greathouse, too, was inspired to "strike the post," in the worst Indian fashion.  He gathered
thirty-two whites, and hid them in Baker's house. He feared that the Logan camp had heard of
the Cresap killings, so he crossed over the river, to investigate.

A friendly squaw warned him to go back, or he might be harmed, for the camp was very angry.
Back he went.  Because he was afraid to attack the camp with his thirty-two men, he invited
the Indians over, to drink "peace" with him.  He was a rum seller, himself.

On April 30, they came.  First a canoe containing six warriors, Logan's sister, another woman,
and a little girl.  The warriors were made drunk, and all but the little girl were butchered.

Across the river Logan heard the shooting.  He sent two men in a canoe to find out what was
the matter.  They were killed.  A larger canoe was sent.  It was ambushed and the survivors
fled back to the camp.

Now Logan learned that his sister and brother had been murdered.  They were the last of his
blood relatives.  That was his reward for having remained the friend of the white man.  That
was his reward for having opened his cabin to the white wayfarer.  He went bad, himself.  He
saw only red, and he vowed vengeance.  A bitter wrath turned his heart sour.  He felt that
he must grasp the hatchet, buried so long ago by his father Shikellemus.

The war spirit blazed high among whites and reds on the frontier.  The whites accused the Indians
of many thoughts and deeds--some false, some true.  The Indians accused the whites of many
deeds--mainly true. Block-houses were hastily erected, for the protection of settlers. Governor
Dunmore of Virginia called out troops in earnest.  "Dunmore's War" as well as "Cresap's War"
was this named.

The Shawnees, the Delawares, the Mingo Cayugas, the Wyandot Hurons, held councils in their
Scioto River country of central Ohio.  Belts were sent to the Miamis on the west and the Senecas
on the east.  There were debates upon striking the Long Knives, as the Virginians were called.

These Long Knife Americans had crossed the rivers and the mountains, were possessing themselves
of Ohio, and even of Kentucky; much blood had been shed, and the wiser heads among the tribes
did not know exactly what to do about it.

The great Cornstalk, loved chief of the Shawnees, and now fifty years in age, lifted his voice
for peace.  He could see no good in a war against the Americans.  Logan, gnawed by his own
wrongs, remained apart and said little.  But the Americans struck first.

Hoping to keep the Indians at home, in June four hundred border men were ordered by Governor
Dunmore of Virginia to attack the villages in Ohio.  They marched west across country until
in southern Ohio they destroyed two Shawnee towns.

The light-skinned Shawnees were known as the fiercest, most stubborn fighters among all the
Algonquins between the Alleghanies and the Mississippi River.  Now their hot natures burst.
Chief Cornstalk yielded.

"It is well," he said.  "If you go to war, then I will lead you.  If we fight at all, we must
fight together."

But of the Indians it was Logan who first struck the Long Knives.  With only seven warriors
he suddenly appeared in Virginia itself.  This was Long Knife country.  Here, July 12, he fell
upon William Robinson, Thomas Hellen and Coleman Brown, three settlers who were gathering flax
in their field.

Brown died under the first volley; Hellen and Robinson ran hard. Hellen was an old man, and
easily caught, but William Robinson was young and strong.  Dodging and legging, he had almost
reached the timber.  Hearing loud shouting, with English words, behind him, and fearing a rifle
bullet, he turned his head and lunged full tilt into a tree.  Down he dropped, stunned.

After a bit he came to.  He was lying, securely tied, hands and feet. Logan was sitting quietly
beside him, waiting for him to waken.  The old man Hellen had not been harmed, either.  Logan's
party took their two captives to Logan's town in Ohio--treated them kindly on the way.

"What will be done to us at your town?" asked Robinson.

"You will be made to run the gauntlet," answered Logan.  "But if you listen to my words, you
will not be hurt.  You must break through the lines and run to the council house.  When you
are in the council house, you will be safe.  That will end the gauntlet."

Approaching the Mingo and Shawnee towns, Logan uttered a terrific scalp-halloo, as signal of
success.  Warriors hastened out.  The gauntlet was formed.  This was two lines of warriors,
squaws and children, armed with sticks, clubs and switches.  Through the long, narrow, living
aisle the two prisoners had to make their way.

Remembering Logan's advice, Robinson charged aside, broke through, and raced for the council
house.  All out of breath, he reached it ahead of his howling pursuers.  No Indian dared to
attack him there.  It was sanctuary.

Poor old Mr. Hellen failed.  The lines were stout, the clubs and switches blinded him; before
he had reached the council house a war-club struck him helpless.  He might have been beaten
to death had not Robinson bravely grabbed him and dragged him in.

He had won his life, and was adopted into an Indian family.  Now the Indians were angry with
Robinson.  They decided to burn him at the stake.

"Have no fear.  You shall not die," asserted Logan.

But matters looked bad.  He was tied to the stake.  While he stood there, with the squaws howling
around him, he heard Logan speak, appealing for his life.

"The most powerful orator I've ever listened to," afterward said Robinson.  "His gestures and
face were wonderful!"

The warriors still called for fire.  The torch was ready, when Logan sprang angrily forward.
With his own hatchet he cut the ropes, and marching the white captive through the mob landed
him in the lodge of an old squaw.  Few chiefs would have dared an act like this, to save merely
a white man, and an enemy.

However, Logan was not yet done.  Thirteen of his people, he claimed, had been killed by the
whites; and thirteen white scalps should pay. Just before he set out on the war-path again,
he brought to William Robinson a goose-quill and some gun-powder.

He bade Robinson sharpen the quill, and with gunpowder-and-water for ink write a letter.

This note was carried clear down into western Virginia, as if to show how far Logan could reach.
It was found tied to a war-club and left at a plundered settler's cabin.

Logan never would believe but that Michael Cresap had killed the warriors and women at Yellow
Creek.  When Captain Cresap heard of this note, and that he was blamed, he said that he would
like to sink his tomahawk in Daniel Greathouse's head!

Chief Logan was not long in getting his thirteen scalps.

"Now," he announced, "I am satisfied.  My relations have been paid for. I will sit still."

He was not to sit still yet.  The hands of the Shawnees grasped the hatchet very firmly.  Forty
scalps at a time had been hung in the Shawnee lodges, but the spirits of their fathers and
the ashes of their towns called for more.  The Delawares had not taken payment enough for the
scalp of old Bald Eagle.  The Senecas remembered that many years ago eight of their warriors
were attacked by one hundred and fifty Long Knife soldiers.  The Mingos had not forgotten the
massacre of the Conestogas.  The Wyandots were red, and hated the white face in the east.

These nations formed the league of the Northern Confederacy, to defend themselves.  Cornstalk
the Shawnee was chosen head chief.  He brought word that far across the Ohio River, in north-western
(now West) Virginia, he and his comrade had met a great column of Long Knives, advancing over
the mountains, as if to invade the Indian country.  His comrade had been killed.  He himself
had come back, with the word.

Taking eleven hundred warriors--the pick of the Shawnees, the fighting Delawares, the Wyandots,
the Mingo Cayugas and the Mingo Senecas--Chief Cornstalk marched rapidly down to give battle.

There really were two American columns, on their way to destroy the Shawnee and Mingo towns
in interior Ohio.

The Division of Northern and Western Virginia, twelve hundred men, had mustered at Fort Pitt
(Pittsburg, Pennsylvania), in the territory disputed by Virginia and Pennsylvania.  It was
under command of Lord Dunmore himself, governor of Virginia for the king of England.

The Division of Southern and Eastern Virginia, fifteen hundred men, had mustered at Lewisburg,
West Virginia.  It was under command of General Andrew Lewis, a valiant soldier.

The Lord Dunmore division was to march south, the General Lewis division was to march west;
the two were to join forces at Point Pleasant, where on the border of West Virginia the Big
Kanawha River empties into the noble Ohio.

Cornstalk moved fast.  He had as aides Logan of the Cayugas, Chi-ya-wee of the Wyandots, Scop-pa-thus
of the Senecas, young Red Hawk of the fighting Delawares, his own son El-li-nip-si-co--noted
chiefs, all. Among the Shawnee sub-chiefs was Puck-ee-shin-wah, father of a boy named Tecumseh
who grew to the greatness of Pontiac.

The General Lewis division had arrived first at the mouth of the Big Kanawha.  On the evening
of October 9, from the opposite side of the Ohio, Cornstalk's and Logan's men sighted them
there, in camp.

Fresh news had come to Cornstalk.  He had learned of the other division, under Lord Dunmore.
He had learned that the column across from him was equal to his own force, and that another
detachment of it was hurrying on its trail.

In a council of the chiefs and principal warriors he proposed that he go over, in person, and
treat for peace.  But all his men voted him down.

"Very well," he replied.  "If you are resolved to fight, then fight you shall.  We must not
delay.  It is likely that we shall have hard work tomorrow, but if any warrior attempts to
run away, I will kill him with my own hand."

This night the warriors ferried the Ohio, above the camp, by means of seventy-eight rafts.
They worked hard, and formed for battle at daybreak.

"We will make a line behind the Long Knives," ordered Cornstalk, "and drive them forward like
bullocks into the two rivers."

Most of the Virginians were asleep in their tents, when, before sunrise, two of their hunters,
seeking deer for breakfast, found the Indian army, already in battle array, and covering, as
one of the hunters excitedly reported, "four acres of ground."

But these Virginians were no fools.  Of the eleven hundred here, wellnigh every man had been
a buckskin borderer, deadly with rifle, tomahawk and knife, and up to all Indian tricks.  They
were fairly drilled, too, as militia.  A number of the officers had fought under Major George
Washington, when on the fatal Braddock's Field, in 1755, the American Rangers had tried to
save the day from the French, and from Pontiac's whooping warriors.

They all had marched for five weeks across one hundred and sixty miles of trackless mountain
country, driving their pack-horses and their herds of beef cattle; now they rallied briskly
to save their lives.  It was nip and tuck.

From before sunrise until sunset raged the great battle of Point Pleasant, or the Big Kanawha.
It was the first pitched battle between simon-pure Americans--but the Revolution was near and
after this the Americans were to do their own fighting.

The lines were over a mile long, rarely more than twenty yards apart, frequently less than
six yards apart, and sometimes mingling.  The armies were equal.

Both sides fought Indian fashion, from behind trees and brush.  Rifle met rifle, tomahawk met
tomahawk, knife met knife.  The air was filled with whoops and cheers.  Able chiefs faced able
chiefs--on the white American side there were leaders who soon became more famous in the Revolution
and in the history of the new nation.

It was a long-famous battle.  A ballad written upon it was frequently sung, on the frontier:

  Let us mind the tenth day of October,
  Seventy-four, which caused woe;
  The Indian savages they did cover
  The pleasant banks of the O-hi-o.

  The battle beginning in the morning,
  Throughout the day it lashed sore,
  Till the evening shades they were returning
  Upon the banks of the O-hi-o.

  Seven score lay dead and wounded.
  Of champions that did face their foe,
  By which the heathens were confounded,
  Upon the banks of the O-hi-o.

  Col. Lewis and noble captains
  Did down to death like Uriah go.
  Alas, their heads wound up in napkins,
  Upon the banks of the O-hi-o.

  O bless the mighty King of Heaven
  For all his wondrous works below,
  Who hath to us the victory given,
  Upon the banks of the O-hi-o.

Logan was seen here, there, everywhere.  So was Cornstalk.  His mighty voice was heard above
the din, like the voice of old Annawan when King Philip had been surprised.  "Be strong!  Be
strong!" he appealed to his warriors.  With his tomahawk he struck down a skulker.  That had
been his promise, in the council.

All this October day the battle continued.  In single encounters, man to man, valorous deeds
were done.

Cornstalk proved himself a worthy general.  When his line bent back, before the discipline
of the Long Knives, it was only to form an ambush, and then the whites were bent back.  He
had early placed his warriors across the base of the point, so that they held the whites in
the angle of the two rivers.  They dragged logs and brush to position, as breast-works.  "We
will drive the Long Knives into the rivers like so many bullocks."

That was not to be.  Two of General Lewis's colonels had fallen; the Indian fire was very severe
and accurate; but after vainly trying to feel out the end of the red line, the general at last
succeeded, toward evening, in sending a company around.

Chief Cornstalk thought that this company, appearing in his rear, was the absent part of the
division.  Lest he be caught between two fires, he swung about and skillfully withdrew.

The battle slackened, at dusk.  This night he safely removed his army across the Ohio again,
that they might avoid the Lord Dunmore division and protect their towns in Ohio.

Nearly all the Indian bodies found, and nearly all the Virginians killed and wounded, were
shot in the head or the breast.  That was the marksmanship and the kind of fighting!

The Long Knives lost seventy-five men killed and one hundred and fifty wounded.  They lost
two great chiefs: Colonel Charles Lewis, the brother of the general, and Colonel John Field--both
Braddock men; six captains and as many lieutenants were killed, also.

The Indians said that had they known how to clean their rifles, they would have done better.
Cornstalk and Logan lost the sub-chief Puck-ee-shin-wah, but only forty or fifty others in
killed and wounded. But when they hastened for their towns they found them in danger from the
Lord Dunmore column.

Governor Dunmore sent Chief White-eyes, of the Delawares, who had not joined in the war, to
ask Chief Cornstalk for a talk.  Chief White-eyes returned with no answer, for the Cornstalk
chiefs were in bitter council.

Cornstalk addressed them:

"You would not make peace before Point Pleasant; what is your voice now, when the Long Knives
are pressing on in two columns?"

There was no reply.

"We cannot save our villages," he continued.  "If your voice is for war, let us first kill
our women and children.  Then let us warriors go out and fight like men until we, too, are killed."

Still no reply.  Cornstalk dashed his hatchet into the council post.

"You act like children," he thundered.  "I will go and make peace, myself."

And leaving his hatchet sticking in the post, go he did.

Logan had not been here.  He was away, down in Virginia, scouting with his Mingos, and delivering
his note to Captain Cresap.  On October 21 he arrived with scalps.

He refused to meet the governor.

"Tell the governor that I am a warrior, not a councillor," he bade.

His sore heart was not yet healed.  His Mingos were for war.  The Revolution was brewing, and
Governor Dunmore was anxious to be about his own affairs.  So he sought out Logan with two
messengers, Scout Simon Girty, and Trader John Gibson, who spoke the Mingo tongue.  Not one!

Trader Gibson reported that while making this speech, Logan wept.  The sad-hearted chief probably
did not put his words in exactly this order, but they made a great sensation.  Soon they were
being repeated throughout all the Ohio River country, and east of the Alleghanies, in towns,
cabins and camps.

"Who is there to mourn for Logan?" would ask some voice, in the circle. And another voice would
reply, with deep feeling: "Not one!"

President Thomas Jefferson included the speech in a book that he published--"Notes on Virginia,"
and said that he challenged the orations of the world to produce anything better.

It was copied into other books.  School-children memorized it, for "speaking day"; grown people
used it, in contests; and for one hundred years it was the favorite platform piece.  Thus Logan
lived in the white man's words.

Still Logan did not come in to the peace talk held with Governor Dunmore, southeast of present
Circleville in south central Ohio.  The Shawnees and Delawares said:

"Logan is like a mad dog.  His bristles are up; they are not yet fallen, but the good talk
may smooth them down."

He stayed close in his cabin, up the Scioto River, and Cornstalk spoke for the Shawnees, Delawares
and Wyandots.  It was another great address.

Cornstalk told of the wrongs suffered by the Indians, in their hunting grounds; how they were
losing the lands of their fathers, and were being cheated by the white men.  He asked that
nobody be permitted to trade, on private account, with the Indians, but that the Government
should send in goods, to be exchanged for skins and furs, and that no "fire water" should enter
into the business, for "from fire water there comes evil."

Then he buried the hatchet.  He never dug it up.  When the Revolution broke, in 1776, and the
British agents urged the Indians to strike the post again and help their great father, the
king, Cornstalk held firm for friendship with the Americans.

In the spring of 1777, he and young Red Hawk the Delaware, and another Indian came down to
the American fort that had been built on the battle field of Point Pleasant at the mouth of
the Big Kanawha of the West Virginia border.

"My Shawnees are restless," he warned.  "The current sets so strongly against the Americans,
that I fear my people will disobey me and float with the stream."

Captain Matthew Arbuckle was the commander of the fort.  He kept the Cornstalk party as hostages
for the good behavior of the Shawnees. Cornstalk did not object, but spent much time in talking
with the officers, and in kindly drawing maps of the Ohio country, for them.

Those brave words were not forgotten.  This same day somebody shouted loudly from the opposite
side of the Ohio.  It was the young Chief Ellinipsico.  He had not known what had happened
to his father, and had traveled many miles, seeking him.

Cornstalk called him over.  There was much rejoicing in the reunion; they loved each other dearly.

On the very next day two soldiers, named Hamilton and Gilmore, went over the Kanawha River,
to hunt.  The majority of the Ohio Indians were now helping the British.  Some of the hostile
warriors, lurking in West Virginia, fired on the two men and killed Gilmore.

Instantly the cry arose among the soldiers at the fort, that Ellinipsico had planned the ambush.
Ellinipsico denied it.  He said that he had come alone, on purpose to find his old father.

But that made no difference.  Captain John Hall and squad were returning in a canoe bearing
the body of Gilmore.

"Let us go and kill those Indians in the fort!"

Captain Arbuckle and Private Stuart tried in vain to force them back. In their cabin, of the
fort, the Chief Cornstalk party had been told by a white woman that they were in danger.  They
now heard the Captain Hall men approaching.  Young Ellinipsico grew frightened, but his father
steadied him.

"My son," said Cornstalk, "the Great Spirit has seen fit that we should die together, and has
sent you here to that end.  It is his will, and let us submit--it is all for the best."

He faced the door, and stood calmly waiting.  Without a word or a struggle he fell dead, pierced
through the front by seven bullets. Ellinipsico was now calm, also.  He did not even stand,
and thus he died, not moving.  He was a worthy son of Cornstalk.  Young Red Hawk was a Delaware
and, hoping to be spared, he crept into the fire-place chimney.  But he was dragged out, to
death.  The fourth Indian fought with his hands, and was cut to pieces.

The murderers of the generous, noble-hearted Cornstalk were never punished, but they certainly
were not admired.  The white men who had met him in war and in peace mourned him as much as
the red men did. And from that day the Shawnee nation "became the most deadly foe to the inhabitants
of the frontiers."  Who may blame them?

Meanwhile Logan was living in misery, but he was soon to follow Chief Cornstalk.  His end was
far less happy.  He had not been much heard from lately.  After he had refused to meet the
Long Knives in a peace talk, the troops had destroyed some of his villages.  He and a band
of his Mingos retreated northward toward the Great Lakes.

The Mingos aided the British, but Logan pursued fire-water more frequently than he did war.
He never got over his grief.  It had bitten him too deeply, and had poisoned his thoughts.
Still, the good in him cropped out.

When in 1778 the famous American scout Simon Kenton had been captured by the Shawnees, he was
taken, by the torture trail, to the village in northern Ohio where Logan was living.

He had little hopes, but Logan walked over to him.

"Well, young man," said Logan in good English, "these other young men seem very mad at you."

"Yes, sir; they certainly are," frankly answered Simon Kenton.  Already one arm had been almost
cut from his shoulder, by an axe.

Logan gravely smiled.

That was the real spirit of Logan.  The two runners were sent, and Simon felt much encouraged.
During the next day he was well treated in the village.  He and Logan talked together freely.

In the evening the two runners returned.  They went straight to Logan's lodge, but no word
came to Kenton.  Now he feared again.  He feared more, when in the morning Logan himself approached
him, said only, "You are to be taken at once to Sandusky," gave him a piece of bread and whirling
on his heel strode gloomily away.

Evidently the power of Logan had weakened, the Shawnees had not listened, and Sandusky, north
on the Sandusky River, was waiting with the stake.

So Simon Kenton journeyed unwillingly onward, to be saved, at the last moment, by the British.
But Logan had done his best.  After this he drank harder, until his mind was injured.  He had
flashes of good, and he had longer flashes of bad.  He seemed bent upon doing as much harm
to himself as he could.

Then, in 1780, one day at Detroit he thought that while drunk he had killed his Shawnee wife.
He imagined that he was being arrested; and in the fight that he made he was shot dead by his
own nephew, on the road between Detroit and Sandusky.

Many mourned Cornstalk.  "Who was there to mourn Logan"--the "friend of the white man?"

"Not one!"

But the name "Logan" was worn, like a badge of honor, by others in the Mingo people.

CHAPTER X

LITTLE TURTLE OF THE MIAMIS (1790-1791)

HE WINS GREAT VICTORIES

During the Revolution, by which the United States became an independent nation, the great majority
of the Indian tribes within reach took active part on the side of the British.

The Iroquois fought out of friendship, they said; the tribes farther west fought in the hope
of keeping the settlers out of the Kentucky, Ohio and Indiana country.

For some years after the war, which closed in 1782, there was a dispute between the United
States and England over the carrying out of certain terms in the treaty of peace.  Until the
matter was settled, the British kept Detroit and other American frontier posts.

This encouraged the Indians.  They had been much astonished and alarmed to find that the Americans
had "laid the king on his back."  Now that the British had lost the fight, what would happen
to them?

But the British agents and traders still in the Indian country urged them on to make good their
boast that "no white cabin should smoke beyond the Ohio."  It was reported that the king was
only resting, and that the Americans yet had no right to any land west of the Ohio River.

So the Miamis, the Potawatomis, the Ottawas, the Shawnees, the war Delawares, the Chippewas,
the Kickapoos, the Wyandots, the Senecas, refused to meet the Americans in council or to bury
the hatchet.  They formed a league of defense.

The Miamis were the central nation.  "People who live on the peninsula" was their Chippewa
name--for they were Algonquins from the Chippewa and Ottawa country north of the Great Lakes.
"Twanh-twanh," the cry of the crane, was their own name.  Miamis, from the Chippewa word Omaumeg,
were they called in English.

They had been described by early travelers as a pleasant-faced, lively, very polite people,
slow of speech, swift of foot, fond of racing, and obedient to their chiefs.

Their present home was in the Wabash River valley of northern Indiana, up as far as the modern
city of Fort Wayne.  They claimed this country and also all of western Ohio, where they formerly
had lived.  The Shawnees and the Wyandots of Ohio had moved in behind them, they said, and
were merely tenants upon their lands.

Little Turtle, or Mich-i-kin-i-kwa, had become their chief.  He had been born on the Eel River
near Fort Wayne in 1752.  Therefore now at the close of the Revolution he was thirty years
old.  He had not been born a chief, nor even a Miami.  To be sure, his father was chief and
a Miami, but his mother was a Mohegan of the Delawares.  By Indian law he had ranked as only
a warrior and a Mohegan.  An Indian was known by his mother.

As a boy of eleven or twelve he had been stirred by the Pontiac war, in which the Miamis had
joined.  As a warrior he had campaigned with the British under General Burgoyne who surrendered
at Saratoga.

So by his deeds and his experience in field, camp and council he was a veteran and had won
the chieftainship of the twelve hundred Miamis.

Although his name was Little Turtle, he had nothing little in his make-up.  On the contrary,
he was of good size, strong and dignified, with a long face and full high forehead--not the
face or forehead of a Miami.  He seems to have been rather sarcastic, and unpopular.

Those were bloody days while the new United States was trying to extend across the Ohio River.
A treaty was made with the Cherokees and Chickasaws of the South, and with the Six Nations
of the North; one was supposed to have been made with these Ohio country tribes, also.

These Indians said that they would do nothing for peace until they had talked with their British
"father" at Detroit.  They were not sure that the king had really surrendered their lands beyond
the Ohio.

They asserted that their treaty, by which they had sold their lands, had not been signed by
the proper chiefs.

In the seven years since the end of 1782, some two thousand American settlers and traders had
been killed or captured, along the Ohio River; twenty thousand horses had been stolen.  The
rifle was more necessary than the ax and plough.

The Miami villages on the northern border between Ohio and Indiana formed the base for the
many war parties.

So in 1790, President George Washington and Congress ordered General Arthur Saint Clair, the
governor of this Northwest Territory, to clear the land for the smoke of the white cabins.

Little progress had been made by the white settlements, across the Ohio River.  There were
only two of any note: Marietta, named for the French queen Marie Antoinette; and the newer
Cincinnati, christened in 1790 by Governor Saint Clair himself.  There were several smaller
ones, struggling to live.

The governor called for regulars and militia.  General Josiah Harmar, the commander-in-chief
of the United States army, was detailed in charge.  On October 3 he started from Fort Washington,
at Cincinnati, with three hundred and twenty regulars of the First Infantry, and eleven hundred
and thirty-three militia of Kentucky and Pennsylvania, to destroy the towns of Little Turtle
the Miami.

Little Turtle of course soon knew all about this.  His spies infested the region.  He rallied
his bands.  The Indians whom he commanded--Ottawas, Potawatomis, Chippewas, Shawnees, Senecas,
Delawares, Miamis, and so forth--were the same nations that had obeyed the Bloody Belt of Pontiac.
He had able aides, too; the skilled Buc-kon-ga-he-las of the Delawares, Blue-jacket of the
Shawnees, and others--great fighters, every one.

White men, also, were helping him.  There were three, especially: Simon Girty, Matthew Elliott,
and Alexander McKee, who was part Indian.  They were three traitors who had deserted from the
American garrison at Fort Pitt, in 1778, and had spread false reports among White-eyes' Delawares,
and elsewhere.

Serving the enemies of their country, they had continued to live among the Shawnees and Wyandots,
and in their savagery were worse than the Indians.  Their names are red on the pages of history.

In Chief Little Turtle's main village, sometimes called "Girty's Town," located a few miles
southeast of present Fort Wayne, Indiana, there was another white man--a young man.  His name
had been William Wells, but now was Black Snake.  The Indians had captured him when a little
boy in Kentucky; he had grown up with the Miamis, had married Chief Little Turtle's sister,
and was rated as a Miami warrior.  But his heart was not bad.  They both were veterans of the
Revolution, had good fighters under them, and might be thought well matched.  But the general
got threshed.

Little Turtle waited for him to come on, and plagued his march with parties of scouts who in
the swamps and thickets cut off his foraging squads.

The general had tough going, for two weeks.  When on October 17 he arrived at Girty's Town,
he found it abandoned and burning, to deprive him of more supplies.

Then General Harmar made his first mistake.  He detached thirty of the First Infantry regulars,
under Captain John Armstrong, and one hundred and fifty of the militia, under Colonel John
Hardin of Kentucky, to follow the retreating Indians and perhaps destroy the next village.

He played into the hands of Little Turtle, who had over a thousand warriors.  Colonel Hardin
and Captain Armstrong had marched scarcely six miles, when in an open place they were completely
ambushed.  A swarm of Indians suddenly poured in a heavy fire from the brush on all sides;
rose, and charged with tomahawk and knife.

This was too much for the militia, who were poorly drilled.  Away they pelted, trying to reach
the main army.  But the well-drilled regulars stood stanch, and met the tomahawk with the bayonet,
in the hope of forcing a passage.

The Little Turtle warriors cared nothing about the militia, and let them go.  The few regulars
did not last long.  Every soldier except two officers and two privates was killed.

Of these two officers, in the break-up Ensign Asa Hartshorne of Connecticut fortunately stumbled
over a log and lay concealed until he might escape.

Captain Armstrong crouched to his neck in a swampy pond, and stayed there all night, while
only two hundred yards from him the enemy held a war-dance over the bodies of the slain.  They
had whipped the trained soldiery, who had fought bravely.

The next day, with all his army General Harmar advanced upon the Miami towns.  Little Turtle
had ordered them burned.  The general destroyed the corn-fields and the fruit-trees; and seeing
no Indians to fight, turned back for Fort Washington.

He had gone about ten miles, when scouts brought word that the Indians were gathering in their
towns again.  The general made a second mistake.  Colonel Hardin, stung by the way in which
his militia had acted, begged for another chance.  Instead of going, himself, General Harmar
again detached some of the militia--six hundred this time--and sixty of the regulars under
Major John P. Wyllys of Washington's old Continentals.  He told Colonel Hardin to find the Indians.

The colonel found them, on the morning of October 22.  His only fear had been that they would
run off and not give him his revenge.  But he had not counted the strategy of Little Turtle.

When the first few Indians were sighted, Colonel Hardin made careful and scientific preparation.
He attacked.  The Indians did run off, with the happy, shouting militia in full hue and cry
after.  The regulars followed slowly.  When a gap of two miles had opened, as if from the very
earth out sprang Little Turtle's whole remaining force, a thousand, and the hapless regulars
were in the same plight as before.

The militia fought their way back, too late.  The battle on the field had become hand-to-hand.
Both sides were brave; but when a soldier thrust with his bayonet, two tomahawks were there,
to crash into his skull.

Major Wyllys was killed; so was Lieutenant Ebenezer Frothingham; fifty of the rank and file
fell.  Only eight men escaped.  Of the militia, a major, two captains, and over ninety others died.

After he had been joined by the survivors, General Harmar resumed his march to Fort Washington.
He claimed a victory, because he had destroyed the Indians' winter supplies; but he had lost
one hundred and eighty-three soldiers killed, and forty wounded, and the Indians not more than
fifty warriors.

The victory and the field of battle were left to Little Turtle. General Harmar had proved to
be a commander whose orders were "Go" instead of "Come," and Colonel Hardin had not known how
to fight Indians.

However, Little Turtle realized that the Americans had other officers, and that General Washington
was not a man to back down..  There would be another army.

So he spent much of the winter in visiting various tribes and enlisting them.  He went as far
north as Ontario of Canada, and there appealed to the Missisauga nation of Algonquins.  He
traveled west to the Illinois River.  He was a second Pontiac.

General and Governor Saint Clair himself was the officer appointed by President Washington
to lead the next expedition against the Little Turtle army.  He was a gallant old Continental,
aged fifty-seven and gray-haired.  As a young officer in a Scotch regiment he had come over
to America with a British army, in 1758, to fight the French and Indians.  After that war he
had become a true American citizen of Pennsylvania, and as colonel and major-general had served
with the Buff-and-Blue in the war for American independence.

He had been unlucky in his campaigns, but nobody ever doubted his courage.  General Washington
thought highly of him, and now took pains to say, in person, to him, before the start was made:

"Beware of a surprise.  You know how the Indians fight.  So I repeat--beware of a surprise."

General Saint Clair had been promised three thousand men, but when early in September of this
year 1791 he left Fort Washington, he had only two thousand men.  Still, it was a strong army,
comprising the greater portion of the whole army of the United States. I never have been ill a
moment in all my life, and strength never has failed me for work to which I set my hand.

"The rapidly decreasing supply of drugs and the adulterated importations early taught me that
the day was coming when it would be an absolute necessity to raise our home supplies. So, while yet
in my teens, I began collecting from the fields and woods for miles around such medicinal stuff
as grew in my father's fields, marsh, and woods, and planting more
wherever I found anything growing naturally in its prime.

I merely enlarged nature's beds and preserved their natural condition. As the plants spread and
the harvest increased, I built a dry-house on scientific principles, a large store-room, and later
a laboratory in which I have been learning to prepare some of my
crude material for the market, combining ideas of my own in remedies,
and at last producing one your president just has indicated that I
come to submit to you as a final resort in certain conditions.

"My operations now have spread to close six hundred acres of almost
solid medicinal growth, including a little lake, around the shores
of which flourish a quadruple setting of water-loving herbs."

Occasionally he shifted his position or easily walked across the platform
and faced his audience from a different direction.

His voice was strong, deep, and rang clearly and earnestly. His audience sat on the front edge of
their chairs, and listened to something new, with mouths half agape. A few times Carey turned
from the speaker to face the audience. He agonized in his heart that it was a closed session, and
that his wife was not there to hear, and that the Girl was missing it.

By the bent backs and flying fingers of the reporters at their table
in front he could see that to-morrow the world would read the Harvester's
speech; and if it were true that the little mother had shortened her
days to produce him, she had done earth a service for which many generations
would call her blessed.

For the doctor could look ahead, and he knew that this man would not escape. The call for him
and his unimpeachable truth would come from everywhere, and his utterances would carry as far as
newspapers and magazines were circulated. The good he would do would be past estimation.

The Harvester continued. He was describing the most delicate and difficult of herbs to secure. He
was telling how they could be raised, prepared, kept, and compounded. He was discussing diseases
that did not readily yield to treatment, pointing out what drugs
were customarily employed and offering, if any of them had such cases,
and would send to him, to forward samples of unadulterated stuff sufficient
for a test comparison with what they were using.

He was walking serenely and surely into the heart of every man before him.

Just at the point where it was the psychological time to close, he
stopped and stood a long instant facing them, and then he asked softly,
"Did any man among you ever see the woman to whom he had given a strong
man's first passion of love, slowly dying before him?"

One breathless instant he waited and then continued, "Gentlemen, I
recently saw this in my own case.

For days it was coming, so at night I shut myself in my laboratory,
and from the very essence of the purest of my self-compounded drugs
I distilled a stimulant into which I put a touch of heart remedy,
a brace for weakening nerves, a vitalization of sluggish blood.

As I worked, I thought in that thought which embodied the essence of prayer, and when my day
and my hour came, and a man who has been the president of your honourable body, and is known
to all of you, said it was death, I took this combination that I now present to you, and with
the help of the Almighty and a woman above the price of rubies, I
kept breath in the girl I love, and to-day she is at full tide of
womanhood.



He was respectfully listened to as a wise captain, and he and Little Turtle carried the day.

"But the gray-haired general is always ready for a surprise attack."

"All right.  Wait until the hour when he is not ready.  Then strike."

Under the direction of Commander-in-Chief Little Turtle, in the darkness this night the Indian
army stole forward and was posted with as much skill as any white army.

The Miamis held the center; the Wyandots, the Delawares and the Senecas held the right; the
Ottawas, the Potawatomis, the Shawnees, and others, held the left.

They were ready.  They could hear the challenges of the alert sentries, at the gray-hair's
camp.  Two hours before day-break they heard the drums beating the reveille.  The soldiers
of the gray-hair were on the watch.

The light in the east broadened.  Securely hidden, the Little Turtle army waited.  They might
see the dim tents of the militia advance-guard, camped a quarter of a mile this side of the creek.

Beyond, where the main camp was under arms, the smoke of the fires began to thicken.

Toward the time of sunrise the soldiers grew tired of standing in ranks.  The dawn-hour for
surprise by Indians had passed.  Trumpet and drum-roll sounded for "Break ranks."  Having stacked
their guns the soldiers gladly made for their tents,  or squatted around the breakfast fires.

Another day had begun, without event.

Little Turtle allowed fifteen minutes or so, for the soldiers to settle and doze.  Then he
gave the signal, a half hour before sunrise.

General Saint Clair was lying sick in his tent.  There burst a distant rifle shot; it was instantly
followed by a crackling volley, as from half a thousand rifles--and an answering heavier volley
from the muskets of the militia.

Struggling to don his blanket-coat he limped out, his gray queue ragged.  The camp sprang to
arms, for officers and men knew their business; but here came the militia like a drove of stampeded
cattle, legging frantically for shelter from a horde of whooping, darting Indians.  The militia
dived through the lines of the regulars, into the very center of the camp, and for a short
period all was chaos.

It was a furious fight.  Re-forming their lines, the regulars stood well.  They checked the
charge by a thunderous volley from the long-barreled flint-lock muskets--the same as used at
Brandywine, Princeton and Yorktown.

The strategy of Little Turtle and his chiefs was excellent.  They shifted the attack from point
to point.  They attacked both lines at once.  They took advantage of every cover, and constantly
appeared closer.  They killed every horse and every gunner of the artillery posted in the center.

Of the Second Infantry, all the officers fell except two.  General Butler hastened bravely
up and down the one line, encouraging the troops; General Saint Clair limped heroically up
and down the other line.  Eight bullets pierced his clothing--a lock of his hair was shorn
off.  General Butler was shot twice; and while he was sitting, mortally wounded, an Indian
rushed in and tomahawked him.

General Saint Clair's army was being shot to pieces.  He ordered bayonet charges; but when
these had cleared a little space, the Indians re-appeared, thicker than ever.  Their fire,
it is recorded, "was tremendous."

The camp was entered, and pillaged.  Some two hundred and fifty women, among them the general's
dashing daughter, had come with the army; and these suffered terribly.

After three hours' battle, the general ordered a final charge, to open a way.  Pressing behind
the bayonets, the weary troops commenced a retreat of twenty-nine miles to Fort Jefferson.

The general, on a poor pack-horse, insisted on bringing up the rear. Out of his less than fourteen
hundred soldiers, thirty-eight officers and six hundred men were killed or missing; twenty-one
officers and two hundred and forty-two men were wounded.  Fifty of the women had died. It was
as bad as the defeat of General Braddock's army, in 1755.  For a year and a half the field
was covered with bleaching bones.

Little Turtle, the Missisauga chief and Simon Girty the white savage had directed the attack.
After a pursuit of four miles, seeing that the soldiers were on the run and throwing away guns,
knapsacks, and all, they called the chase off.

It had been victory enough.  They had captured seven pieces of cannon, two hundred cattle,
many horses; they returned to the villages with one hundred and twenty scalps strung on one
pole, and with three pack-horses piled high with kegs of liquor.

Their own loss was stated to be fifty-six.  Surely this was a great triumph for Commander-in-Chief
Little Turtle.  Another American army--as good a selection as had opposed the British themselves
in many a battle of the Revolution--had been fairly outwitted and fairly defeated, by Indians.

General Anthony Wayne was appointed to try next.  "Mad Anthony," soldiers and citizens had
styled him, because of his head-long valor in the Revolution.  He was a good man for the job,
if he did not act too fast and get ambushed.

He took his time.  The army of the United States was reorganized into the Legion of the United
States.  He was placed in command.

There were four Sub-legions, or corps, each composed of artillery, dragoons, infantry and riflemen.
The enlisted men wore round caps like helmets.

The badge of the First Sub-legion was white binding, with short plumes of white wool and black
horse-hair.

The badge of the Second Sub-legion was red binding, with short plumes of red wool and white
horse-hair.

The badge of the Third Sub-legion was yellow binding, with yellow wool and black horse-hair.

The badge of the Fourth Sub-legion was green binding, with green wool and white horse-hair.

"Another defeat will be ruinous to the reputation of the United States," had said President
Washington.  With this in mind, General Wayne declared for drilling his troops hard, at Legionville,
below Pittsburg.  Infantry, artillery and cavalry were kept busy at target practice, broad-sword
practice, and battle formations.

In the spring of 1793 he moved down to Fort Washington at Cincinnati. On August 8, he marched
north, with two thousand troops the equal of any troops in the world, to invade the country
of the Miamis.

Meanwhile there had been fighting, but the warriors of Little Turtle showed no signs of letting
up.  A message from the British had told them that war with the United States was due this
year, and that the Indians were expected to hold their ground.

Now the great warrior "Mad Anthony" was advancing.  Him, the Indians much respected.  His reputation
was known.  They had named him "Black Snake," and "Big Wind" or "Whirlwind."  From the methods
with which he made his marches--his men deployed in open order, his dragoons sweeping the flanks,
his scouts before, and every night's camp pitched early and surrounded by a log breast-works--they
saw that he was wise.

He established more forts.  He erected a new one near the site of Fort Jefferson at Greenville,
Ohio; and spent the winter there.  He built Fort Recovery on the skull-dotted field where General
Saint Clair had been routed.  There the Wayne men defeated the Little Turtle men.  The Indians
spent two nights in carrying off their dead and wounded.  But the British from Detroit had
come southward and built another fort for themselves--Fort Maumee--at the Maumee River Rapids,
in northwestern Ohio, south of modern Toledo.

That was a rallying-place for the allied Indians, and encouraged them. The "Big Wind" continued,
laying waste the villages and fields.  He built Fort Defiance in the very heart of the Miami
country, and proceeded down the Maumee River toward the British fort.

Within seven miles of the British fort he built Fort Deposit.  He had two thousand Legionaries,
and eleven hundred mounted Kentucky riflemen; Little Turtle's army was being driven back upon
the British fort, and must fight or quit.

So far, the "Big Wind" had proved himself the master.

By this time Little Turtle had lost his brother-in-law, "Black Snake" or William Wells, whose
blood was the white blood, and who could no longer fire upon his race.

When he had heard that another American army was on its way, he had led Little Turtle apart.

"I now leave your nation for my own people," he had said.  "We have been friends.  We are friends
yet until the sun is an hour higher. From that time we are enemies.  Then if you wish to kill
me, you may. If I want to kill you, I may."

William Wells plunged into the forest, and found General Wayne.  He became a valuable scout
with the United States column.

From Fort Deposit General Wayne sent word to the Miamis that they must make peace at once,
or be attacked.  Little Turtle called a council. Some of his men were dubious.

"It is no use fighting that man.  His eye is never shut," they complained.

Little Turtle himself was dubious.  The council debated upon whether to try another "Saint
Clair" surprise, or to choose their ground, and wait.

Blue-jacket the Shawnee was for fighting.

"Listen," spoke Little Turtle.  "We have beaten the enemy twice, under separate generals. 
We cannot expect the same good fortune always.  Think well of it.  Something whispers to me
that we could do well to treat with him."

Somebody accused Little Turtle of being afraid, at last.  That was enough.  He objected no
more, and the council decided to form battle array and wait, at Presq' Isle, near the British
fort.  Blue-jacket took charge.

It was good ground for defense.  Another "Big Wind" had passed through the timber, and laid
the trees crisscross in great confusion.  Amidst this maze Little Turtle, Blue-jacket, Simon
Girty, and the other leaders stretched three lines of warriors and half-breeds, in a front
two miles long.  Their left rested at the river, their right was protected by a thicket, the
British fort was behind them.

The British commander had said that he would open his gates to them, if they were again driven
back.

The "Big Wind," who never slept, had not delayed.  This morning of August 20,1794, he marched
right onward, in battle array.  At noon he struck the Fallen Timbers, at Presq' Isle.

Now he was "Mad Anthony," again.  He made short work of the Little Turtle army of fifteen hundred.
He sent his Kentucky mounted riflemen against their right flank; he sent his dragoon regulars
against their left flank; he sent his regular infantry in a bayonet charge straight through
their center.  They were not to fire a shot until the Indians had broken cover; then they were
to deliver a volley and keep going so hard that the enemy would have no time to reload.

For once, Little Turtle's warriors did not stand.  They feared this mad general.  The trained
infantry Legionaries moved so fast that they outfooted the cavalry; and they alone drove the
warriors helter-skelter back through the timber, to the very walls of the British fort.

There the mounted riflemen and the dragoons smote with their "long knives," or broad-swords--for
the gates of the fort were not opened, and the walls proved only a death-trap.

The Battle of Fallen Timbers was over in about an hour.  The Americans lost thirty-eight killed,
one hundred and one wounded.  The loss of the Miamis and their allies numbered several hundred.
Nine Wyandot chiefs had been slain.

Their warriors were scattered, their villages and corn-fields were destroyed, the British had
not helped them, United States forts occupied their best ground from the Ohio River right through
north to Lake Erie, and the long war had ended.

The Miamis and eleven other nations signed a treaty of peace, at Greenville, in August of the
next year, 1795.

"I am the last to sign," said Little Turtle, "and I think I will be the last to break it."

Ever after this, Little Turtle lived at peace with the Americans.

The United States built him a house on his birthplace at the Eel River twenty miles from Fort
Wayne, Indiana.  He tried to adopt civilization and bring his people to agriculture and prosperity.

He was opposed by jealous chiefs, who envied him his house and accused him of having been bought
by the Americans.  But he was wiser than they.

He had been the first of the great chiefs to frown upon the torture of captives; give him a
good mark for that.  Now he frowned upon liquor. With Captain William Wells, his friend, he
appeared before the Kentucky legislature, and asked for a law against selling liquor to the
Indians. In the winter of 1801-1802 he asked to be vaccinated, at Washington, and took some
of the vaccine back with him, for his people.

He frequently visited Philadelphia.  There he met the famous Polish patriot Kosciusko.  They
had many talks.  Kosciusko presented him with a fine pair of pistols and a valuable otter-skin
robe.

Chief Little Turtle died July 14, 1812, while on a visit at Fort Wayne. The notice in a newspaper
said:

"Perhaps there is not left on this continent, one of his color so distinguished in council
and in war.  His disorder was the gout.  He died in a camp, because he chose to be in the open
air.  He met death with great firmness.  The agent for Indian affairs had him buried with the
honors of war."

His portrait, painted by a celebrated artist, was hung upon the walls of the War Department
at Washington.

One was Lieutenant William Henry Harrison, aged twenty-one, of the Americans.  The other was
Sub-chief Tecumseh, aged twenty-six, of the Shawnees.

They were the sons of noted fathers.  Benjamin Harrison, the father of Lieutenant Harrison,
had been a famous patriot and a signer of the Declaration of Independence in 1776.  Puck-ee-shin-wah,
the father of Tecumseh, also had been a patriot--he had died for his nation in the battle of
Point Pleasant, in 1774, when Chief Cornstalk fought for liberty.

At the Fallen Timbers, Lieutenant Harrison was an aide to General Wayne; young Tecumseh was
an aide to Blue-jacket.  The two did not meet, but their trails were soon to join.

The name Tecumseh (pronounced by the Indians "Tay-coom-tha") means "One-who-springs" or "darts."
It was a word of the Shawnees' Great Medicine Panther clan, or Meteor clan; therefore Tecumseh
has been known as "Crouching Panther" and "Shooting Star."

He was born in 1768 at the old Shawnee village of Piqua, on Mad River about six miles southwest
of present Springfield, Ohio.  His mother may have been a Creek or Cherokee woman, who had
come up from the South with some of the Shawnees.  The Shawnees were a Southern people, once.
The mother's name was Me-tho-a-tas-ke.

Tecumseh had five brothers and one sister.  Two of his brothers were twins, and at least two,
besides his father, fell in battle while he was still young.

He had not been old enough to go upon the war trail with his father and Head Chief Cornstalk;
but his elder brother Chee-see-kau went, and fought the Long Knives at Point Pleasant.  When
he came back he took little Tecumseh in charge, to train him as a warrior.

When Tecumseh was nineteen, he and Chee-see-kau, with a party of other braves, went upon a
long journey of adventure south to the Cherokee country of Tennessee.  It is said that the
mother, Me-tho-tas-ke, already had left, to return to the Cherokees.  Likely enough the two
brothers planned to visit her.

They swung far into the west, to the Mississippi, and circled to the Cherokees.  Here Ohee-see-kau
was killed, while helping the Cherokees fight the whites.

He was glad to die in battle--"I prefer to have the birds pick my bones, rather than to be
buried at home like an old squaw."

Tecumseh stayed in the South three years, fighting to avenge his brother, who had been a father
to him, and whose spirit still urged him to be brave.  He got home to Ohio just in time.  In
league with the Little Turtle Miamis, War Chief Blue-jacket's Shawnees had defeated the American
general Harmar, and every warrior was needed.

Tecumseh had left as a young brave; he returned as a young chief.  He was sent out with a party
to spy upon the march of the gray-haired general, Saint Clair.  He did good work, but he missed
the big battle. But he was at the Fallen Timbers.

Here, in the excitement when the American infantry came scrambling and cheering and stabbing,
through the down trees, he rammed a bullet into his rifle ahead of the powder, and had to retreat.

"Give me a gun and I will show you how to stand fast," he appealed, to the other Indians. 
He was given a shot-gun.  The white soldiers were too strong, his younger brother Sau-wa-see-kau
was killed at his side, and he must fall back again.

This hurt his heart.  When the treaty with General Wayne was signed, the next year, he did
not attend.  Blue-jacket, his chief, afterwards sought him out and told him all about it: that
the Indians had surrendered much land.

For some years the peace sun shone upon the Ohio country.  Tecumseh was careful to cast no
red shadow.  He bore himself like an independent chief; gathered his own band of Shawnees,
married a woman older than himself, lived among the Delawares, and spent much time hunting.
He became known for his ringing speeches, in the councils; no Indian was more eloquent.

He was handsome, too--a true prince: six feet tall and broad shouldered, of active and haughty
mien, quick step, large flashing eye's, and thin, oval Indian face, with regular features.
His face was the kind that could burn with the fire of his mind.

In 1800 the Northwest Territory of which General Saint Clair had been the first governor was
divided.  The name Northwest Territory was limited to about what is now the state of Ohio;
all west of that, to the Mississippi River, was Indiana Territory.

Captain William Henry Harrison, who had resigned from the army, was appointed governor and
Indian commissioner, of Indiana Territory.  He moved to Vincennes, the capital, on the lower
Wabash.  Chief Tecumseh was living eastward on the White River.  Their trails were pointing
in. Two master minds were to meet and wrestle.

The name of one of the two twins, brothers of Tecumseh, was La-la-we-thi-ka, meaning "Rattle"
or "Loud Voice."  He was not handsome.  He was blind in the right eye and had ugly features.
He was looked upon as a mouthy, shallow-brained, drunken fellow, of little account as a warrior.
His band invited Tecumseh's band to unite with them at Greenville, in western Ohio where General
Saint Clair's Fort Jefferson and General Wayne's Fort Greenville had been built.

Then, almost immediately, or in the fall of 1805, "Loud Voice" arose as the Prophet.

While smoking his pipe in his cabin he fell backward in a pretended trance, and lay as if dead.
But before he was buried, he recovered. He said that he had been to the spirit world.  He called
all the nation to meet him at Wapakoneta, the ancient principal village of the Shawnees, fifty
miles northeast, and listen to a message from the Master of Life.

The message was a very good one.  It was a great deal like the message of the Delaware prophet,
as used by Pontiac.  The Indians were to cease white-man habits.  They must quit fire-water
poison, must cherish the old and sick, must not marry with the white people, must cease bad
medicine-making (witch-craft) and tortures; and must live happily and peacefully, sharing their
lands in common.

As for him, he had been given power to cure all diseases, and to ward off death on the battle-field.

He changed his name to Ten-skwa-ta-wa--the "Open Door," but is generally styled the Prophet.
His words created intense excitement. Shawnees, Delawares and other Indians came from near
and far to visit him.  Tecumseh was very willing.  It was a great thing to have a prophet for
a brother--and whether this was a put-up job between them, is to this day a mystery.  But they
were smart men.

The Prophet enlarged his rant.  To the whites he proclaimed that he, the Open Door, Tecumseh,
the Shooting Star, and the other twin brother all had come at one birth.  He asserted that
their father had been the son of a Shawnee chief and a princess, daughter of a great English
governor in the South.

Anybody whom he accused of witch-craft was put to death.  They usually were persons that he
did not like.  The Delawares and Shawnees killed old chiefs who were harmless, and friends
of the settlers.

Although the Open Door's teachings seemed to be for peace and prosperity among the Indians,
they brought many Indians together, and aroused much alarm among the settlers of Ohio and Indiana
Territory. Moreover, the gatherings at Greenville were upon ground that had been sold to the
United States, under the treaty after the battle of the Fallen Timbers.

Governor Harrison sent a message to the Delawares, in the name of the Seventeen Fires--the
United States.

"Who is this pretended prophet who dares to speak for the great Creator?

The Delawares listened, even the Shawnees were sickening of the witch-craft fraud--but the
Prophet seized upon an opportunity.

In this 1806 an eclipse of the sun was due, and he knew, beforehand. Perhaps he was told by
British agents, for the war of 1812 was looming, and there was bad feeling between the two
white nations.

"The American governor has demanded of me a sign," he proclaimed.  "On a certain day I will
darken the sun."

And so he did.

His fame spread like a wind.  Runners carried the news of him and of his power through tribe
after tribe.  He made long journeys, himself. In village after village, from the Seminoles
of Florida to the Chippewas of the Canada border, from the Mingos of the Ohio River to the
Blackfeet of the farthest upper Missouri, either he or some of his disciples appeared.

They bore with them a mystic figure, the size of the body of a man, all wrapped in white cloth
and never opened.  This they tended carefully. They bore with them a string of white beans,
said to be made from the Prophet's flesh.

They preached that dogs were to be killed; lodge fires were never to go out; liquor was not
to be drunk; wars were not to be waged, unless ordered by the Prophet.  Each warrior was obliged
to draw the string of beads through his fingers; by this, he "shook hands" with the Prophet,
and swore to obey his teachings.

It was rumored that within four years a great "death" would cover the entire land, and that
only the Indians who followed the Prophet would escape.  These should enjoy the land, freed
of the white men.

Tecumseh bowed before his talented brother, and had his own dreams; dreams of a vast war league
against the Americans.  The Prophet was in control of eight or ten thousand warriors.

The Prophet's band at Greenville increased to four hundred--Shawnees, Delawares, Wyandots,
Chippewas, and others; a regular hodge-podge.

Captain William Wells, who was the Indian agent at Fort Wayne, asked them to have four chiefs
come in, to listen to a message from their Great Father, the President.

On a sudden Tecumseh took the lead, as head chief.  I shall expect him in six days from this time."

Captain Wells then sent the message.  The President asked the Indians to move off from this
ground which was not theirs.  He would help them to select other ground.

Tecumseh replied hotly, in a speech of defiance.

"These lands are ours; no one has a right to remove us, because we were the first owners. 
The Great Spirit above knows no boundaries, nor will his red people know any.  If my father,
the President of the Seventeen Fires, has anything more to say to me, he must send a big man
as messenger.  I will not talk with Captain Wells."

"Why does not the President of the Seventeen Fires send us the greatest man in his nation?"
demanded the Prophet.  "I can talk to him; I can bring darkness between him and me; I can put
the sun under my feet; and what white man can do this?"

This month of May, 1807, fifteen hundred Indians had visited the Prophet.  They came even from
the Missouri River, and from the rivers of Florida.  A general up-rising of the tribes was feared.

Governor Harrison worked, sending many addresses.  He could not stem the tide set in motion
by the Prophet and kept in motion by Tecumseh.

"My children," appealed Governor Harrison, "this business must be stopped.

"I am sorry that you listen to the advice of bad birds," answered the Prophet, of the one eye
and the cunning heart.  "I never had a word with the British, and I never sent for any Indians.
They came here themselves, to hear the words of the Great Spirit."

Tecumseh also made speeches, at the councils.  Once he spoke for three hours, accusing the
whites of having broken many treaties.  Some of his sentences the interpreter refused to translate,
they were so frank and cutting.  The teachings of the Prophet his brother were apparently all
for peace, and against evil practices such as drinking and warring; and Governor Harrison could
only wait, watchfully.  But he did not like the signs in the horizon.  There were too many
Indians traveling back and forth.

The war of 1812 with Great Britain was drawing nearer.  The Sacs and Foxes of the Mississippi
country had accepted presents from the British.  Governor Harrison was warned that the Prophet
and Tecumseh had been asked to join.

In the summer of 1808 the Prophet moved his town to the north bank of the Tippecanoe River,
on the curve where it enters the upper Wabash River in northern Indiana.  He still had a following
of Shawnees, Chippewas, Potawatomis, Winnebagos, and so forth.

This was Miami land, shared by the Delawares.  They objected.  But the Prophet's Town remained.

In 1809 the United States bought from the Miamis a large piece of territory which included
this land.  The Prophet's people refused to move off.  The Great Spirit had told them that
the Indians were to hold all property in common; therefore no tribe might sell land without
the consent of all the tribes.

Tecumseh was absent, on a visit to other tribes.  He asked the Wyandots and the Senecas to
come to Prophet's Town on the Tippecanoe.  But the Wyandots and the Senecas had no wish to
offend the United States again. They remembered that the British had not opened the gates of
the fort to them, when the "Big Wind" was blowing them backward--"You are painted too much,
my children," they accused the British of saying--and they were wary of Tecumseh.

He asked the Shawnees of the upper country, also, to join him and the Prophet.  But they declined
to meddle.  Old Black Hoof, a chief whose memory extended back ninety years, advised against it.

The Prophet was more clever than Tecumseh.  The Wyandots were the keepers of the great belt
which had bound the Ohio nations together in Little Turtle's day.  The Prophet asked them if
they still had it, and if they, the "elder brothers," would sit still while a few Indians sold
the land of all the Indians.

They replied they were glad to know that the belt had not been forgotten.  Let the Indians
act as one nation.  They passed the belt to the Miamis--and the Miamis were forced to obey.

Governor Harrison was told that there were eight hundred warriors at the Prophet's Town, and
that Vincennes was to be attacked.

News of Tecumseh came from here, there, everywhere.  He seemed to be constantly traveling,
carrying the words of the Prophet his brother. Something was going on, underneath the peace
blanket.  Governor Harrison and others of the whites read the puzzle in this wise:

The peace blanket spread by the Prophet to cover all red nations and make them one, concealed
a hatchet, as the blanket of Pontiac concealed a gun.  The Indians were to be increased and
strengthened by right living and good habits, until fitted to stand on their feet without aid.
Then, all together, as one nation, they could strike for their country, from the Ohio River
west to the Missouri.

Tecumseh was to be the Pontiac who would lead them.  It was a scheme so wonderful, so patient
and so shrewd, that the Western whites might well gasp before it.

The governor and Tecumseh had never met.  The Prophet had been in Vincennes several times,
to explain that he preached only peace--which was true.  But the town at the Tippecanoe was
getting to be a nuisance. Horse-thieves and murderers used it as a shelter, and the authority
of the United States was defied.  A messenger sent there by the governor was threatened by
the Prophet with death.

The message was sent to warn the brothers that the Seventeen Fires were surely able to defeat
all the Indians united, and that if there were complaints, these should be taken directly to
the President.  They say one land belongs to the Miamis, another to the Delawares, and so on;
but the Great Spirit intended it as the property of us all.  Our father tells us we have no
right upon the Wabash.  The Great Spirit ordered us to come here, and here we will stay."

However, Tecumseh said that he remembered the governor as a very young man riding with General
Wayne, and he would go to Vincennes and talk with him.  He probably would bring thirty of his men.

"The governor may expect to see many more than that," added the Prophet.

Tecumseh brought not thirty, but four hundred warriors, painted and armed.  Attended by a small
guard, the governor stood to receive him on the broad columned porch of the official mansion.
Tecumseh, with forty braves, approached, and halted.  He did not like the porch; he asked that
the council be held in a grove near by.

"Your father says that he cannot supply seats enough there," answered the interpreter.

"My father?" retorted Tecumseh, his head high.  "The sun is my father, the earth is my mother,
and on her bosom will I repose!"

In the grove he made a ringing, fiery speech.  He accused the United States of trying to divide
the Indians, so as to keep them weak.  He blamed the "village" or "peace" chiefs for yielding,
and said that now the war chiefs were to rule the tribes.  He warned the governor that if the
lands along the Wabash were not given back to the Indians, the chiefs who had signed the sale
would be killed, and then the governor would be guilty of the killing.  He threatened trouble
for the whites if they did not cease purchasing Indian land.

"It is all nonsense to say that the Indians are all one nation," reproved Governor Harrison,
who was as fearless as Tecumseh.  "If the Great Spirit had intended that to be so, he would
not have put six different tongues into their heads.  The Miamis owned these lands in the beginning,
while the Shawnees were in Georgia.  You Shawnees have no right to come from a distant country,
and tell the Miamis what shall be done with their property."

Tecumseh sprang up and angrily interrupted.

"That is a lie!  You and the Seventeen Fires are cheating the Indians out of their lands."

The warriors leaped up, as if to attack.  The few whites prepared for defense.

"You are a man of bad heart," thundered the governor, to Tecumseh.  "I will talk with you no
more.  You may go in safety, protected by the council-fire, but I want you to leave this place
at once."

Other councils were held.  Tecumseh stood as firm as a rock, for what he considered to be the
rights of the Indians.  He was very frank.  He said that if it were not for the dispute about
the land, he would continue to be the friend of the Seventeen Fires.  He would rather fight
with them than against them.  He had no love for the British--who clapped their hands and sicked
the Indians on as if they were dogs.  As for making the Indians one nation, had not the Seventeen
Fires set an example when they united?  It was true, he said, that now all the Northern tribes
were one.  Soon he was to set out, and ask the Southern tribes to sit upon the same blanket
with the Northern tribes.

The governor knew.  From Governor William Clark of Missouri he had received a letter telling
him that friendship belts and war belts were passing among the nations west of the Missouri
River, calling them to an attack on Vincennes.  The Sacs of the upper Mississippi had sent
to Canada for ammunition.

From Chicago had come word that the Potawatomis and other tribes near Fort Dearborn were preparing.

Governor Harrison had suggested that the two brothers travel to Washington and talk with the
President about lands.  He himself had no power to promise that treaties should not be made
with separate nations.  He also said, to Tecumseh:

"If there is war between us, I ask you to stop your Indians from abusing captives, and from
attacking women and children."

Tecumseh promised, but he went out upon his trip.  Before he left, he asked that nothing should
be done regarding the land, before he came back; a large number of Indians were on the way
to settle there, and they would need it as a hunting-ground!  If they killed the cattle and
hogs of the white people, he would fix up everything with the President, on his return.

So in August of 1811 he left, taking twenty warriors.  With the fire-brand of tongue and the
burning mystery of his presence he kindled the nations of the South.  He spoke in the name
of the Great Prophet. He urged them all to join as one people and dam back the white wave that
was seeking to swallow them.

He told them that the Prophet had stationed a "lamp" in the sky, to watch them for him--and
sure enough, a comet flamed in the horizon.  To a Creek chief in Alabama he said:

"You do not mean to fight.  I know the reason.  You do not believe that the Great Spirit has
sent me.  You shall know.  I go from here to Detroit; when I arrive there I will stamp on the
ground with my foot and shake down all your houses."

In December occurred an earthquake which destroyed New Madrid town on the Mississippi in southern
Missouri, and was felt widely.  The ground under the Creek nation trembled.  The Creeks covered
their heads and cried aloud:

"Tecumseh has got to Detroit!"

That was so.  In December Tecumseh really had got to Detroit.  But he had stamped his foot
before time, and he had not made the earth to tremble.  He had stamped in wrath not at the
Creeks, but at his own people.

When he had left for the North he was ready to strike, at any moment, with five thousand warriors
of North, South and West.  When he arrived home, he found that his plans were shattered like
a bubble; he had no Prophet, and the former Prophet had no town!  He took nine hundred regulars
and rangers, to visit the Prophet's Town, himself, and see what was what.

He camped within a mile of the sacred place, on a timber island of the marshy prairie seven
miles north-east of the present city of Lafayette, Indiana.  During the darkness and early
daylight of November 7, this 1811, he was attacked by the Prophet's warriors.  He roundly whipped
them in the hot battle of Tippecanoe.

The Prophet had brewed a kettle of magic, by which (he proclaimed to his warriors) he had made
one half of the American army dead, and the other half crazy.  During the attack he sat upon
a high piece of ground, and howled a song that should keep his warriors invisible and turn
the bullets of the white men.

But something was wrong with the kettle, and something was wrong with the song; for the Americans
fought hard when surprised, and none seemed to be dead; and of the one thousand Shawnees, Winnebagos,
Chippewas, Kickapoos, forty were killed by the bullets and many more wounded.

Of the Americans, thirty-seven were killed and one hundred and fifty-two wounded.  They pressed
on to the town, and burned it in spite of the Great Spirit.

"You are a liar!" accused a Winnebago, of the Prophet.  "You said that the white people were
dead or crazy, when they were all in their senses and fought like demons!"

When Tecumseh arrived with his good news, the Indians were scattered. In his camp the "Prophet"
was being hooted at by even the children. Tecumseh was so enraged with his brother for not
having somehow kept the peace until the time for war was ripe, that he seized him by the hair
of the head and shook him until his teeth rattled.

To Governor Harrison, Tecumseh announced that he was well-minded for the visit with the President.

"If you go, you must go alone, without any company of warriors," replied the governor.

"I am a great chief, and I will not go in such a shameful fashion," said Tecumseh.  So he went
to Canada instead.

Now the game was up.  The Prophet had proved to be no prophet from the Great Spirit.  The Indians
felt cheated, and were not afraid to speak boldly.

Councils were held by twelve tribes, together.  Band opposed band.  The Delawares, the Miamis,
the Kickapoos, most of the Wyandots, were for peace with the Americans, and for letting the
British alone.  So were the Potawatomis; they accused the Prophet of leading them falsely.

Captain Elliott, the traitor and British agent, threatened to have the Wyandots arrested for
their talk.

The band of Canadian Wyandots touched the British war-hatchet; so did Tecumseh and the Prophet.
The war between the white people had commenced.

Between-the-logs brought a message to the Canadian Wyandots, from Head Chief Crane, of all
the Wyandots.  They were to come back to their hunting-grounds.

Round-head of the hostile Wyandots spoke.

"Tell the American commander it is our wish that he should send more men against us.  We want
to fight in good earnest."

The British agent Captain Elliott spoke.  "Tell my wife, your American father, that I want
her to cook the provisions for me and my red children more faithfully than she has done.  If
she wishes to fight with me and my children, she must not burrow in the earth like a ground-hog.
She must come out and fight fairly."

Between-the-logs answered valiantly, in behalf of Chief Crane the wise man:

"Brothers!  I entreat you to listen to the good talk I have brought. If you doubt what I have
said about the force of the Americans, you can send some of your people to examine it.  The
truth is, your British father tells you lies and deceives you.

"And now, father, I will bear your message to my American father.  You compare the Americans
to ground-hogs.  I must confess that a ground-hog is a hard animal to fight.  He has such sharp
teeth, such a stubborn temper, and such unconquerable spirit, that he is truly a dangerous
animal, especially when in his own hole.  But, father, you will have your wish.  Before many
days you will see the ground-hog floating on yonder lake, paddling his canoe toward your hole;
and then you may attack him to suit yourself!"

This council was held at Brownstown, beside Lake Erie, south of Detroit.  Nobody cared anything
about the Prophet--he was no warrior. But an invitation was sent to Tecumseh, in Canada, across
the Detroit River.

"No," he answered.  "I have taken sides with the king, my father, and my bones shall bleach
upon this shore before I will recross that stream to join in any good words council."

The Wyandots privately told Between-the-logs that the most of them were being held prisoners
by the British; but that they accepted the belt from Head Chief Crane, and would return to
the Americans as soon as possible.  And they did.

Tecumseh, however, had made up his mind.  He was an honest enemy. There never was anything
half-way about Tecumseh.  His promised army of five thousand warriors had shrunk to less than
one hundred; only thirty of these were with him, but he set about getting more.

The Prophet his brother was down at the Fort Wayne agency in Indiana. "Open Door" had partly
explained away his failure in the battle of Tippecanoe.  His wife, he said, had touched his
medicine and spoiled its power, before the battle, and he had not known.

Tecumseh sent a rider with word for the Prophet to remove all the Indian women and children
to the Mississippi, and to bid the warriors strike Vincennes.  He himself would join, if he
lived, in the country of the Winnebagos--which was Wisconsin.

Delawares, Senecas, Chief Crane's Wyandots and the majority of the Shawnees themselves refused
to rise against the Americans.  The other Indians waited for stronger signs.  But they did
not need to wait long.

Tecumseh's star became fixed in the sky--he won the first battle of the war and won it for
the British.  Commanding seventy Indians and forty soldiers he whipped an American force at
Brownstown.

In a second battle there, although the Americans were not captured it was Tecumseh again who
held his position longest.  As reward, he was promoted to brigadier general in the army of
the king.

The Americans surrendered Michilimackinac.  The American big chief, General Hull, retreated
out of Canada.

Runners from Brigadier General Tecumseh spread the news.  The Indians waited no longer.  The
Potawatomis rose, the Miamis rose, the Ottawas and Winnebagos and Kickapoos rose.  Sioux of
Minnesota and Sacs of Illinois hastened forward.  General Tecumseh ruled.

To the Miamis and Winnebagos was assigned the task of taking Fort Harrison near present Terre
Haute of Indiana; to the Potawatomis and Ottawas, aided by Tecumseh and some English, was assigned
the task of taking Fort Wayne.

But the Shooting Star's old foe, William Henry Harrison, was out upon the war trail again.
He lifted the siege of Fort Wayne.  The attack upon Fort Harrison also failed.  From now on
he and Tecumseh fought their fight, to a finish.

This fall and winter of 1812 Tecumseh traveled once more.  From Canada he journeyed south across
a thousand miles of forest, prairie and waters clear to the Indians of Georgia, Tennessee and
Alabama.  He did not now come with word from any Prophet, to make the red people one nation
and a better nation.

He came as a British officer, to bid the Southern Indians join the king's standard, and fight
the Americans into the sea while he and the English did the same work in the north.

He distributed bundles of red sticks for them to count--one stick a day.  With the last stick,
they were to strike.

The Creeks and Cherokees were persuaded, and strike they did.  A bloody trail they made, which
many rains did not wash clean.

Back to the war in the spring of 1813, Tecumseh brought into camp six hundred fresh warriors
from the Wabash.  Now two thousand fighting men obeyed his orders alone.  His command frequently
out-numbered the British command.  He was not a general in name only; he knew military strategy--"he
was an excellent judge of position," admitted the British officers.  He was consulted in the
war councils.

The British thought much of him; the Americans were obliged to think much about him.  But the
star of Harrison also was marching on.  The two stars came together, in the trail.

Tecumseh with his Indians, and the British General Proctor with his soldiers besieged the troublesome
American general at Fort Meigs, near by the battle field of Fallen Timbers.  So again the two
rival chiefs were face to face.

An American detachment was surprised and captured.  The Indians commenced to kill and torture.
General Proctor looked on.  Tecumseh heard and rushed to the scene.  He had given his word
to General Harrison, two years ago, and he was furious at the insult to his honor.

Defending the prisoners with knife and tomahawk, he sprang for the British general.

"Who dares permit such acts!"

"Sir, your Indians cannot be controlled."

"Begone!" roared Tecumseh.  "You are unfit to command; go and put on petticoats."

After that he openly despised General Proctor.

He sent a note in to his American foeman:

"General Harrison: I have with me eight hundred braves.  You have an equal number in your hiding
place.  Come out with them and give me battle.  You talked like a brave when we met at Vincennes,
and I respected you; but now you hide behind logs and in the earth, like a ground-hog.  Give
me answer.  Tecumseh."

But General Harrison knew his business, and carried on to the successful end.

That end was not far distant.  General Tecumseh and General Proctor together failed to take
Fort Meigs.  General Proctor ordered a retreat. General Harrison followed on the trail.  General
Tecumseh hated to retreat.  At every step he was abandoning Indian country.

The retreat northward to Canada continued.  Tecumseh was fighting the battle of his people,
not of the English; he wished to go no farther.

He proposed to his warriors that they leave for another region, and let the Americans and British
fight their own war.

"They promised us plenty of soldiers, to help us.  Instead, we are treated like the dogs of
snipe-hunters; we are always sent ahead to rouse the game."

"You got us into this war by your promises," retorted the Sioux and the Chippewas.  "You have
no right to break us."

Any appeal to Tecumseh's honor was certain to win; he stuck.  Then American ships under Commodore
Oliver Hazard Perry fought British ships under Commodore Barclay, on Lake Erie, and gained
a great victory.

From an island near shore the Tecumseh warriors peered eagerly, to the sound of the heavy guns.

"A few days since you were boasting that you commanded the waters," had said Tecumseh, to General
Proctor.  "Why do you not go out and meet the Americans?  They are daring you to meet them;
you must send out your fleet and fight them."

Tecumseh was no fool.  He had before caught the general in a lie.  We are afraid that our father
will do so again.

Listen!  Our ships have gone out; we know they have fought; we have heard the great guns; but
we know nothing of what happened.  If they defeat us, we will then retreat with our father.
We are resolved to defend our lands, and if it be his will, we wish to leave our bones upon them.

General Proctor writhed under this speech, but he had to swallow it. He might have done better
by taking council with Tecumseh and attacking the Americans at the instant of their landing
on the Canadian shore. The Indians would have fought very hard, even yet, for him.  But he
ordered the retreat again, he burned Fort Maiden, and marched inland up the Thames River of
southwestern Ontario.

Tecumseh went unwillingly.  His Indians were down-hearted.  General Harrison crossed from Detroit,
and pursued.  Tecumseh felt the sting.

"We are now going to follow the British," he said to Jim Blue-jacket, son of old Chief Blue-jacket,
"and I believe we shall never return."

He rode with General Proctor in a buggy, and suggested several places that looked good for
making a stand.

Once General Proctor agreed.  It was indeed an excellent spot, where a large creek joined the
Thames.

"We will here defeat General Harrison or leave our bones," he declared.

That was a talk right to Tecumseh's liking.

"When I look upon these two streams they remind me of the Wabash and the Tippecanoe of my own
country," he said hopefully.

But after Tecumseh had gladly arranged his warriors, General Proctor decided to leave them
as a rear guard and to march on with his soldiers.  The Americans brought up ten cannon, and
Tecumseh was wounded in the left arm, and the Indians had to retreat, also.

On the fourth of October, which was a few days afterward, at another good place Tecumseh said
that he would go no farther into Canada.  This was British soil, not Indian soil.  Unless the
Americans were whipped and the trail home was opened, how were his Indians ever to help the
other Indians fight?

On the morning of the next day, October 5, 1813, he and General Proctor made their battle plans.

"Shall we fight the Americans, father?" asked Sagaunash, or Billy Caldwell.  He was half English
and half Potawatomi, and acted as Tecumseh's secretary, to translate Shawnee into French or
English.

Tecumseh was gloomy.  He had no faith in the British general.

"Yes, my son.  Before the sun sets we shall be in the enemy's smoke. Go.  You are wanted by
Proctor.  I will never see you again."

He posted his men.  Then he addressed his chiefs.

"Brother warriors!  We are about to enter a fight from which I shall not come out.  My body
will remain."  He handed his sword and belt to a friend.

"When my son becomes a great warrior, and able to use a sword, give him this."

Then Tecumseh stripped off his red uniform coat, bearing the gold epaulets of a British brigadier
general.  He was to fight as an ordinary Indian, in buckskin hunting-shirt.

There were nine hundred British soldiers and one thousand Indians. They were well stationed.
The left flank, British, was protected by the deep Thames River; the right flank, Indian, was
protected by a soft swamp.  The Americans of General Harrison came on.  They numbered three
thousand: one hundred and twenty United States regulars, the rest Kentucky volunteer infantry
with one regiment of mounted riflemen under bold Colonel Richard M. Johnson of Kentucky.

Tecumseh would have given a great deal to whip this doughty General Harrison who had come out
of his "hole" at last.  There were old scores between them.  But, as Between-the-logs had warned,
"a ground-hog is a very difficult animal."

General William Henry Harrison of Virginia knew how to fight when in his "hole," or fort--and
he knew how to fight when out of his "hole," and he knew Indian fighting as well as white fighting.

Here were three brigadier generals--Harrison, Tecumseh, and Proctor.

But the battle was soon over.  General Proctor had made the mistake of posting his soldiers
in open order.  General Harrison's eye was quick to note the weakness.  He let the Indians
alone, for a few minutes, and sent the right of the mounted backwoodsmen in a charge against
the British.

The horses broke clear through, wheeled--and the deed had been done. The British soldiers threw
aside their guns, to surrender; General Proctor dashed furiously away in his buggy.

Headed by Colonel Johnson himself, the left companies of the mounted riflemen now charged upon
Tecumseh.  The infantry followed.

The Indians had small chance, but they fought well.  Tecumseh waited until they could see the
flints in the American rifles.  Then he fired, raised the Shawnee war-whoop, they all fired,
and rushed with their tomahawks to the encounter.

Yes, they fought well.  Their close volley had killed many Americans. The horse leader, who
was Colonel Johnson, had been wounded; the horse soldiers were fighting on foot, because the
swamp had entangled the horses' legs.  The American infantry barely stood fast, under the first
shock.

Tecumseh's voice had been heard constantly, shouting for victory--as before him old Annawan
the Wampanoag and Cornstalk the other Shawnee had shouted.  Suddenly the voice had ceased.

A cry arose instead: "Tecumseh is dead!  Tecumseh is dead!"  And at that, as a Potawatomi afterward
explained, "We all ran."

Some people said that Tecumseh had charged with the tomahawk upon the wounded Colonel Johnson,
and that Colonel Johnson had shot him with a pistol, just in time.  Some people denied this.
Colonel Johnson himself said that he did not know--he did not pause to ask the Indian's name,
and did not stay to examine him!  There was quite an argument over the honor--but Tecumseh
did not care.  He was lying dead, in his simple buckskin, and for a time was not even recognized.

A gaudily dressed chief was mistaken for him, until friendly Indians with General Harrison
stated that the great Tecumseh had a ridge on his thigh, from a broken bone.

By this he was found, after nightfall.  He was brought to the camp-fires, where a circle of
the Kentuckians gathered about him, to admire his fine figure and handsome face.  He had been
a worthy foeman.

So Tecumseh quit, at last.  He never could have lived to see the white men pushed across the
Ohio, and all the red men occupying the West as one nation.  That was not written of his star,
or any other star.

But he left a good reputation.  He had been of high mind and clean heart, and he had fought
in the open.  The British adjutant-general at Montreal issued public orders lamenting his death
and praising his bravery.  The British throne sent his young son, Puck-e-sha-shin-wa, a sword,
and settled a pension upon the family, in memory of the father.

The Prophet received a pension, too.  He stayed in Canada until 1826, when he moved down among
the Shawnees of Ohio again.  He long out-lived his greater brother, and died in the Shawnee
village in present Kansas, in 1837.  He posed as a prophet to the very last.

As for General William Henry Harrison, who had broken them both--borne onward by his nickname
"Old Tippecanoe" he became, in 1841, ninth President of the United States; and on his reputation
of having "killed Tecumseh," Colonel Johnson already had been a vice-president.  Soon it was
a poor tribe indeed that did not have a medicine-man who spoke from the Great Spirit.

When Tecumseh first visited the Creeks, in Georgia and Alabama, they were not ready for war.
They were friendly to the whites, and were growing rich in peace.

The Creeks belonged to the Musk-ho-ge-an family, and numbered twenty thousand people, in fifty
towns.  They had light complexions, and were good-looking.  Their women were short, their men
tall, straight, quick and proud.

Their English name, "Creeks," referred to the many streams in their country of Georgia and
eastern Alabama.  They were also called "Muskogee" and "Muscogee," by reason of their language--the
Musk-ho-ge-an.

They were well civilized, and lived almost in white fashion.  They kept negro slaves, the same
as the white people, to till their fields, and wait upon them; they wore clothing of calico,
cotton, and the like, in bright colors.  Their houses were firmly built of reed and cane, with
thatched roofs; their towns were orderly.

With the Chickasaws and the Choctaws, their neighbors in western Alabama and in Mississippi,
they were at war, and had more than held their own.

White was their peace color, and red their war color.  And when Tecumseh gave them the red
sticks, on which to count the days, he did nothing new.  The war parties of the Creeks already
were known as Red Sticks.

This was their custom: that a portion of their towns should be White Towns, where peace ceremonies
should be performed and no human blood should be shed; the other portion should be Red Towns,
where war should be declared by erecting a red-painted pole, around which the warriors should
gather.  The war clans were Bearers of the Red, or, Red Sticks.

The first visit by Tecumseh, in 1811, carrying his Great Spirit talk of a union of all Indian
nations, failed to make the Creeks erect their red poles.  Even the earthquake, that Tecumseh
was supposed to have brought about by the stamping of his foot, failed to do more than to frighten
the Creeks.

But they caught the prophet fad.  Their pretended prophets began to stir them up, and throw
fear into them.  In 1802 the United States had bought from the Creeks a large tract of Georgia;
the white people were determined to move into it.  Alarmed, the Creeks met in council, after
Tecumseh's visit, and voted to sell no more of their lands without the consent of every tribe
in the nation.  Whoever privately signed to sell land, should die.  All land was to be held
in common, lest the white race over-run the red.  That was a doctrine of the Shawnee Prophet
himself, as taught to him by the Great Spirit.

When Tecumseh came down from Canada, in the winter of 1812, on his second visit, the Creeks
were ripening for war.  Their Red Sticks party was very strong.  The many prophets, some of
whom were half negro, had declared that the whites could be driven into the sea.  The soil
of the Creek nation was to be sacred soil.

Traders had been at work, promising aid, and supplying ammunition, in order to enlist the Creeks
upon the British side.

So in the Red Towns the Red Sticks struck the painted poles; the peace party sat still in the
White Towns, and was despised by the Reds as white in blood as well as in spirit.

The hope of the Creeks was to wipe the white man's settlements from the face of Mississippi,
Georgia and Tennessee.  Alabama, in the middle, would then be safe, also.  But the Choctaws,
the Chickasaws, the Cherokees, refused to join.  The White Sticks themselves listened to the
words of their old men, and of Head Chief William Macintosh; they said that they had no feud
with the United States.

Commencing with President Washington, the United States had treated the Creeks honestly; the
Creek nation had grown rich on its own lands.

The Red Sticks went to war--and a savage war they waged; the more savage, because by this time,
the spring of 1813, all the Creeks were not of pure blood.  They had lived so long in peace,
in their towns, that their men and women had married not only among the white people but also
among the black people; therefore their blood was getting to be a mixture of good and bad from
three races.

Head Chief William Macintosh was the peace chief.  He was half Scotch and half Creek, and bore
his father's family name.  He joined the side of the United States.

The war chiefs were Lam-o-chat-tee, or Red Eagle, and Menewa.  They, too, were half-breeds.

Chief Red Eagle was called William Weatherford, after his white trader father who had married
a Creek girl.  He lived in princely style, on a fine plantation, surrounded with slaves and luxury.

Menewa was second to Chief Macintosh.  His name meant "Great Warrior"; and by reason of his
daring he had earned another name, Ho-thle-po-ya, or Crazy-war-hunter.  He was born in 1765,
and was now forty-eight years old.  He and Chief Macintosh were rivals for favor and position.

Menewa was the head war chief--he frequently crossed into Tennessee, to steal horses from the
American settlers there.  A murder was committed by Indians, near his home; Georgians burned
one of his towns, as punishment.  Chief Macintosh was accused of having caused this murder,
in order to enrage the white people against Menewa; and when Macintosh stood out for peace,
Menewa stood out for war.

He and Chief Weatherford led the Red Sticks upon the war trail; but greater in rank than either
of them was Monahoe, the ruling prophet, of Menewa's own band.  He was the head medicine-chief.
He was the Sitting Bull of the Creeks, like the later Sitting Bull of the Sioux.

Out went the Red Sticks, encouraged by Monahoe and the other prophets. Already the white settlers
had become alarmed at the quarrel between the Macintosh bands and the Menewa bands.  When two
Indian parties fight, then the people near them suffer by raids.  All Alabama, Mississippi
and Georgia prepared for defense.

There were killings; but the first big blow with the Creek hatchet, to help the British and
to drive the Americans into the sea, was struck in August against Fort Mimms, at the mouth
of the Alabama River in southwestern Alabama above Mobile.

With all the cunning of the three bloods, the warriors waited until sand enough had drifted,
day by day, to keep the gate of the fort from being quickly closed.  Then, at noon of August
30, they rushed in.  The commander of the fort had been warned, but he was as foolish as some
of those officers in the Pontiac war.  The garrison, of regulars, militia, and volunteers,
fought furiously, in vain.  More than three hundred and fifty--soldiers, and the families of
settlers, both--were killed; only thirty persons escaped.

Now it was the days of King Philip, over again, and this time in Tennessee, Georgia, Alabama
and Mississippi, instead of in Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut.  At the news of
Fort Mimms, the settlers fled for protection into towns and block-houses. If the Choctaws,
the Chickasaws and other Southern Indians joined in league with the Creeks, there easily would
be fifteen thousand brave, fierce warriors in the field.

However, the Choctaws and Chickasaws enlisted with the United States; Chief Macintosh's friendly
Creeks did not falter; and speedily the fiery Andy Jackson was marching down from Tennessee,
at the head of two thousand picked men, to crush out the men of Menewa and Weatherford.

Other columns, from Tennessee, Georgia, Alabama and Mississippi, also were on the trail.  The
Creeks fought to the death, but they made their stands in vain.  The United States was on a
war footing; it had the soldiers and the guns and the leaders; its columns of militia destroyed
town after town--even the sacred Creek capital where warriors from eight towns together gathered
to resist the invader.  Yes, and even the town built by direction of the prophets and named
Holy Ground and protected by magic.

By the close of 1813, this Jackson Chula Harjo--"Old Mad Jackson," as the Creeks dubbed him--had
proved to be as tough as his later name, "Old Hickory."  But Menewa and Weatherford were tough,
too.  They and their more than one thousand warriors still hung out.

In March they were led by their prophets to another and "holier" ground; Tohopeka, or Horseshoe
Bend, on the Tallapoosa River in eastern Alabama.

The Creek town of Oakfuskee was located below.  And here, in 1735, some eighty years before,
there had been a fort of their English friends. It was good ground.

Chief Prophet Monahoe and two other prophets, by song and dance enchanted the ground inside
the bend, and made it safe from the foot of any white man.  Monahoe said that he had a message
from Heaven that assured victory to the Creeks, in this spot.  If the Old Mad Jackson came,
he and all his soldiers should die, by wrath from a cloud.  Hail as large as hominy mortars
would flatten them out.

As was well known to the Creeks, Old Mad Jackson was having his troubles.  The Great Spirit
had sent troubles upon him--had caused his men to rebel, and his provisions to fail, until
acorns were saved and eaten.  The United States could not much longer fight the British and
the Indians together.  Let the Creeks not give up.

The Horseshoe was rightly named, for a sharp curve of the Tallapoosa River enclosed about one
hundred acres of brushy, timbered bluffs and low-land, very thick to the foot.  The entrance
to the neck was only three hundred yards wide.  On the three other sides the river flowed deep.

Menewa was the field commander of the Red Sticks, at this place.  He showed a great head--he
was half white and half red, but all Creek in education.  Across the neck, at its narrowest
point he had a barricade of logs erected, from river bank to river bank.

The barricade, of three to five logs piled eight feet high and filled with earth and rock,
was pierced with a double row of port-holes: one row for the kneeling warriors, and one for
the standing warriors.  The barricade was built in zigzags, along a concave curve, so that
attackers would be cut down by shots from two sides as well as from in front.  By reason of
the zig-zags it could not be raked from either end.

All around the high ground back of the barricade, trees were laid, and brush arranged so that
the warriors might, if driven, pass back from covert to covert, until they reached the huts
of the women and children and old men, at the river, behind.  Here a hundred canoes were drawn
up, on the bank, in readiness.

But the Red Sticks of Chief Menewa had no thought of flight.  They were one thousand.  Their
prophets had assured them over and over that the medicine of the Creek nation was strong, at
last; that the Great Spirit was fighting for them; that the bullets of the Americans would
have no effect, and that the Americans themselves would die before the barricade was reached.
The cloud would come and help the Creeks, with hail--hail like hominy mortars!

On March 24 "Old Mad Jackson," just appointed by President Madison to be major-general in the
United States army, set out against "Crazy-war-hunter" Menewa at Tohopeka.

The way was difficult, through dense timber, swamps and cane-brakes. Alabama, in these days,
had been only thinly settled by white people.

He had three thousand men: a part of the 39th U. S. Infantry, a thousand Tennessee militia,
six hundred friendly Creeks and Cherokees. He had two cannon: a six-pounder and a three-pounder.

His chief assistant was General John Coffee of Alabama, who had formerly been his business
partner.  Major Lemuel P. Montgomery, a Virginian of Tennessee, commanded one battalion of
the regulars.  He was six feet two inches, aged twenty-eight, and "the finest looking man in
the army."  Young Sam Houston, who became the hero of Texas independence, was a third lieutenant.
Head Chief William Macintosh, Menewa's rival, led the Creeks.  Chief Richard Brown led the
Cherokees.

In the evening of March 26 bold General Jackson viewed the Red Sticks' fort, and found it very
strong.  He was amazed by the skill with which it had been laid out.  No trained military engineers
could have done better.

But his Indian spies saw everything--they saw the line of canoes drawn up in the brush along
the river bank behind, at the base of the bend; and General Jackson decided to do what the
Red Sticks had not expected him to do.

Early in the next morning, March 27, he detached General Coffee, with seven hundred mounted
men, the five hundred Cherokees and the one hundred Creeks, to make a circuit, cross the river
below the bend, and come up on the opposite side, behind the Horseshoe.  This would cut off
escape in canoes.

With the remainder of his soldiers he advanced to the direct attack upon the breast-works.
He planted his two cannon.  At ten o'clock he opened hot fire with the camion and with muskets.

Chief Menewa's Red Sticks were ready and defiant.  They answered with whoops and bullets. 
Their three prophets, horridly adorned with bird crests and feathers and jingling charms, danced
and sang, to bring the cloud.  The balls from the cannon only sank into the damp pine logs,
and did no damage.  The musket balls stopped short or hissed uselessly over.

For two hours Old Mad Jackson attacked, from a distance.  He had not dared to charge--the prophets
danced faster, they chanted higher--the Red Sticks had been little harmed--they whooped gaily--they
had faith in their Holy Ground.

But suddenly there arose behind them a fresh hubbub of shots and shouts, and the screams of
their women and children; the smoke of their burning huts welled above the tree-tops.  General
Coffee, with his mounted men, had completely surrounded the bend, on the opposite side of the
river; his Indians had swum across, had seized the canoes, had ferried their comrades over
by the hundred, the soldiers were following--and now the Menewa warriors were between two fires.

At the instant, here came Mad Jackson's troops to charge the barricade.

That was a terrible fight, at the breast-works.  Chief Menewa encouraged his men.  The test
of the Holy Ground protected by the Great Spirit and the prophets had arrived.

The battle was to decide whether the Creek nation or the American nation was to rule in Georgia
and Alabama, and the Red Sticks made mighty defense.  While they raged, they looked for the
cloud in the sky. 

She's a new breed! I was as good a mother as 'twas in my skin to be, and I'd like to see a
child of mine do it for me; and as for my grandchildren, it hustles some of them to re-cog-nize
me passing on the big road, 'specially if it's Peter's girl with
a town beau."

The Harvester laughed.

The old lady leaned toward him with a mist in her eyes and a quaver
in her voice, and asked softly, "Got ary friend that could help you,
David?"

The man looked straight ahead in silence.

"Bamfoozle all the rest of them as much as you please, lad, but I
stand to you in the place of your ma, and so I ast you plainly----got
ary friend that could help?"

"I can think of no way in which any one possibly could help me, dear," said the Harvester gently.
"It is a matter I can't explain, but I know of nothing that any one could do."

"You mean you're tight-mouthed!

You COULD tell me just like you would your ma, if she was up and comin'; but you can't quite
put me in her place, and spit it out plain. Now mebby I can help
you! Is it her fault or yourn?"

"Mine! Mine entirely!"

"Hum! What a fool question! I might a knowed it! I never saw a lovinger, sweeter girl in these
parts. I jest worship the ground she treads on; and you, lad you
hain't had a heart in your body sence first you saw her face.

If I had the stren'th, I'd haul you out of this keeridge and I'd hammer you meller, David
Langston. What in the name of sense have you gone and done to the purty, lovin' child?"

The Harvester's face flushed, but a line around his mouth whitened.

"Loosen up!" commanded Granny. "I got some rights in this case that
mebby you don't remember. You asked me to help you get ready for her,
and I done what you wanted. You invited me to visit her, and I jest
loved her sweet, purty ways. You wanted me to shet up my house and
come over for weeks to help take keer of her, and I done it gladly,
for her pain and your sufferin' cut me as if 'twas my livin' flesh
and blood; so you can't shet me out now. I'm in with you and her to
the end. What a blame fool thing have you gone and done to drive away
for months a girl that fair worshipped you?"

"That's exactly the
trouble, Granny," said the Harvester. "She didn't! She merely respected
and was grateful to me, and she loved me as a friend; but I never
was any nearer her husband than I am yours."

"I've always knowed
they was a screw loose somewhere," commented Granny. "And so you've
sent her off to her worldly folks in a big, wicked city to get weaned
away from you complete?"

"I sent her to let her see if absence would
teach her anything. I had months with her here, and I lay awake at
nights thinking up new plans to win her. I worked for her love as
I never worked for bread, but I couldn't make it.  So he tore loose a hollow joint
of cane; and crouching under the water, with the end of the cane stuck above the surface, he
held fast to a root and breathed through the cane.

Here he stayed, under water, for four hours until darkness had cloaked land and river, and
the yelling and shooting had ceased.  Then, soaked and chilled and stiffened, he cautiously
straightened up.  He waded through the cane-brake, hobbled all night through the forest, and
got away.

But he had no army.  Of his one thousand Red Sticks eight hundred were dead.  Five hundred
and fifty-seven bodies were found upon the Horseshoe battle-field.  One hundred and fifty more
had perished in the river.  Only one warrior was unwounded.  Three hundred women and children
had been captured--and but three men.  The Red Sticks of the Creek nation were wiped out.

Of the whites, twenty-six had been killed, one hundred and seven wounded.  Of the Cherokee
and Creek scouts, twenty-three had been killed, forty-seven wounded.

Chief William Macintosh also had fought bravely, but he had not been harmed.

The Red Sticks now agreed to a treaty of peace with the United States; and Chief Menewa, scarred
from head to foot, was the hero of his band. "One of the bravest chiefs that ever lived," is
written after his name, by white historians.  In due time he again opposed Chief Macintosh,
and won out.

For in 1825 Macintosh was bribed by the white people to urge upon his nation the selling of
the last of their lands in Georgia.  He signed the papers, so did a few other chiefs; but the
majority, thirty-six in number, refused.

Only some three hundred of the Creeks were parties to the signing away of the land of the whole
nation.  The three thousand other chiefs and warriors said that by Creek law, which Chief Macintosh
himself had proposed, the land could not be sold except through the consent of a grand council.

As the nation owned the land, and had built better towns, and was living well and peacefully,
the council decided that Chief Macintosh must be put to death--for he was a traitor and he
knew the law.

Chief Menewa was asked to consent; he ruled, by reason of his wisdom and his scars.  Finally
he saw no other way than to order the deed done, for the Creek law was plain.

On the morning of May 1 he took a party of warriors to the Chief Macintosh house, and surrounded
it.  There were some white Georgians inside.  He directed them to leave, as he had come to
kill only Chief Macintosh, according to the law.

So the white men, and the women and children, left.  When Chief Macintosh bolted in flight,
he was shot dead.

The Georgia people, who desired the Creek land, prepared for war, or to arrest Menewa and his
party.  But the President, learning the ins and outs of the trouble, and seeing that the land
had not been sold by the Creek nation, ordered the sale held up.  The Creeks stayed where they
were, for some years.

Menewa went to war once more, in 1836, and helped the United States fight against the Seminoles
of Florida.  In return for this, he asked permission to remain and live in his own country
of the Creeks.  But he was removed, with the last of the nation, beyond the Mississippi to
the Indian Territory.

There, an old man, he died.  They were of the Algonquian tongue.  From the northern Great Lakes
country they had moved over to the Mississippi River, and down to Illinois and Iowa.  Their
number was not more than six thousand.  They were a shave-head Indian, of forest and stream,
and accustomed to travel afoot or in canoes.

The Foxes built their bark-house villages on the west side of the Mississippi, in Iowa's "great
nose."  They called themselves Mus-qua-kees, or the Red Earth People.  They said that they
had been made from red clay.  Their totem was a fox; and the French of the Great Lakes had
dubbed them Foxes--had asserted that, like the fox, they were quarrelsome, tricky and thievish.
As warriors they were much feared. They had lost heavily.

The Sacs built opposite, on the Illinois shore, from Rock River down. They called themselves
Saukees, from their word O-sa-ki-wug, or Yellow Earth People.  They were larger and better
looking than the Foxes, and not so tricky; but their bravery was never doubted.

These two nations together drove out the other Indians in this new country.  They whipped even
the Sioux, who claimed the northern Iowa hunting grounds; they whipped the Omahas, Osages and
Pawnees of the west, the Mascoutins to the south, and the Illinois tribes.  They were here to stay.

While the men hunted and fished and went to war, the women raised great crops of beans, squashes,
melons, potatoes and Indian corn, and gathered the wild rice of the lakes.

Among the Sac leaders was Ma-ka-tai-me-she-kia-kiak--Big-black-breast, or Black-hawk.  Like
Little Turtle of the Miamis he had not been born a chief; but he was of the Thunder clan, the
head clan of the Sacs.

His father was Py-e-sa, a warrior of the rank of braves, and keeper of the tribal medicine-bag.
His grandfather was Na-na-ma-kee, or Thunder--also a brave.

Black-hawk was born in 1767, in Sauk-e-nuk, the principal Sac village, where Rock Island, Illinois,
now stands, north of the mouth of the Rock River.

He won the rank of brave when he was only fifteen years old.  He did this by killing and scalping
an Osage warrior, on the war-trail against these head-takers.  After that he was allowed in
the scalp-dances.

He went against the Osages a second time.  With seven men he attacked one hundred, and escaped
carrying another scalp.  When he was eighteen, he and five comrades pierced the Osage country
across the Missouri River, and got more scalps.  When he was nineteen, he led two hundred other
braves against the Osages, and killed five Osages with his own hand.

By his deeds he had become a chief.

In a battle with the Cherokees, below St. Louis, his father Pyesa fell. Young Black-hawk was
awarded the medicine-bag--"the soul of the Sac nation."

In the early spring of 1804 a man of the Sac band then living on the Missouri, near St. Louis,
to hunt and trade, killed a white man.  He was arrested.  The Sacs and Poxes held a council
and chose four chiefs to go to St. Louis and buy their warrior's freedom with presents.  This
was the Indian way.

The chiefs selected were Pa-she-pa-ho, or Stabber, who was head chief of the Sacs; Quash-qua-me,
or Jumping Fish; Ou-che-qua-ha, or Sun Fish; and Ha-she-quar-hi-qua, or Bear.

They went in the summer of 1804 and were gone a long time.  When they returned, they were wearing
new medals, and seemed ashamed.  They camped outside of Saukenuk for several days, before they
reported in council.  The man they had been sent to get was not with them.

Finally, in the council they said that they had signed away a great tract of land, mostly on
the west side of the Mississippi above St. Louis, in order to buy the warrior's life; they
had been drunk when they signed--but that was all right.  However, when they had signed, the
warrior was let out, and as he started to come to them, the soldiers had shot him dead.

They still were not certain just what land they had signed away.  That made the council and
people angry.  Black-hawk called the chiefs fools. They had no right to sell the land without
the consent of the council. After this, the "Missouri band" of the Sacs kept by themselves,
in disgrace.

It was too late to do anything more about the treaty.  The United States had it.  An Indian
gets only one chance--and Head Chief Pashepaho himself had put his mark on the paper.  The
United States has two chances: the first, on the ground; the second, when the paper is sent
to Washington.

Later it was found that Pashepaho and the others had signed away all the Sac and Fox lands
east of the Mississippi River!  That was how the treaty might be made to read.  The payment
for many millions of acres was $2,234.54 down, in goods, and $1,000 a year, in other goods.

But there was one pleasing clause.  As long as the United States held the land, the Sacs and
Foxes might live and hunt there.  Any white men who tried to come in were to be arrested and
put off.

At any rate, although Black-hawk raged and said that the treaty was a false treaty, it stood.
The United States officials who had signed it were men of honest names, and considered that
they had acted fairly. But Black-hawk never admitted that.

The United States was to erect a trading post, up the Mississippi, for the convenience of the
Sacs and Foxes.  In 1808 soldiers appeared above the mouth of the Des Moines River, on the
west side of the Mississippi, in southeastern Iowa, and began to build.

This turned out to be not a trading post but a fort, named Fort Belle Vue, and afterward, Fort
Madison.

The Sacs and Foxes, and their allies, the Potawatomis and Winnebagos, planned to destroy it,
and made attacks.

Black-hawk was sore at the Americans.  He listened to the words of Tecumseh and the Prophet,
accepted the presents of the British agents who came to see him, and with two hundred warriors
marched to help the British in the War of 1812.  The British traders had been more generous
with the Indians than the American traders.  Now the British father at the Lakes saluted him
as "General Black-hawk."

Only Black-hawk's band went.  All the other Sacs and Foxes paid attention to the talk of Keokuk,
the Watchful Fox, who was the Sac peace chief.

Like the great Cornstalk, he said to the people that if they were bound to go to war, they
should first put all the women and children "into the long sleep, for we enter upon a trail
that has no turn."

He was called a coward by the Black-hawk band; but the other Sacs and Foxes stayed where they were.

"General" Black-hawk fought beside General Tecumseh.  He asserted that he was in the big battle
when Tecumseh was killed.  When he found that the Indians had nothing to gain in the war, he
came home.  He had done wrong to go at all.

Then he learned that a young man whom he had adopted as a son had been murdered, while hunting,
by bad whites.  They had seized him, tied him, killed him and scalped him.  The young man had
not been to war, and Black-hawk could see no reason for the killing.  So he set forth in revenge,
and fought a battle with the United States Rangers.

He remained unfriendly.  It all dated back to the year 1804, and the treaty signed by Pashepaho,
by which the Sacs had lost their country.

They loved this country.  They especially loved Rock Island, in the Mississippi--where today
is located a Government arsenal.

It was indeed a beautiful island for them.  It bore grapes and nuts, and they called it their
garden.  In a cave there, a kind spirit dwelt, who blessed the land of the Indians.  The spirit
had white wings, like a swan.  But in 1816 the United States built Fort Armstrong right on
top of the cave, and the good spirit flew away, never to come back. The guns of the fort frightened
it.

Black-hawk himself had another favorite spot, upon a bluff overlooking the Mississippi River
and his village of Saukenuk.  Here he liked to sit.  It is still known as Black-hawk's Watch Tower.

After Fort Armstrong was built, and the United States was again at peace with the other white
nations, settlers commenced to edge into this Sac country of western Illinois.  Although by
another treaty, which Black-hawk himself had signed, the treaty of 1804 was re-pledged by the
Sacs and Foxes, this all was United States land, and no settlers had any rights to it.

The Indians were unable to put the settlers off, and trouble arose. Once Black-hawk was taken,
in the forest, by settlers who accused him of shooting their hogs; they tore his gun from him,
and beat him with sticks.

This was such a disgrace to him, that he painted a black mark on his face, and wore the mark
for almost ten years.  Only a scalp could wipe it off.

The white trespassers kept coming in.  They respected nothing.  They even built fences around
the corn fields of the principal Sac village, at the mouth of Rock River; they ploughed up
the grave-yard there; they took possession of Black-hawk's own lodge; and when in the spring
of 1828 the Black-hawk people came back from their winter hunt, they found that forty of their
lodges had been burned.

Up to this time none of the land had been put on the market by the United States.  But the
Indian agent was trying to persuade the Sacs to move across the Mississippi, into Iowa.  That
was for their own good. The white settlers were using whiskey and every other means, to get
the upper hand.

Chief Keokuk agreed with the agent.  He was not of the rank of Black-hawk and the Thunder clan,
but he had fought the Sioux, and was of great courage and keen mind and silver tongue.  He
was an orator; Black-hawk was a warrior.

So the Sacs split.  Keokuk--a stout, heavy-faced man--took his Sacs across into the country
of the Foxes.  Black-hawk's band said they would be shamed if they gave up their village and
the graves of their fathers.

Black-hawk visited some white "chiefs" (judges) who were on Rock Island.  He made complaint.
He said that he wore a black mark on his face; but that if he tried to avenge the black mark,
by striking a white man, then the white men would call it war.  He said that the Sacs dared
not resent having their lodges burned and their corn fields fenced and their women beaten,
and the graves of their fathers ploughed up.

"Why do you not tell the President?"

"He is too far off.  He cannot hear my voice."

"Why do you not write a letter to him?"

"It would be written by white men, who would say that we told lies. Our Great Father would
rather believe a white man, than an Indian."

The two judges said that they were sorry for the Sacs, but could do nothing.

Now in 1829 the settlers were so anxious to keep the Sac lands at the mouth of the Rock River,
that the Government put these on the market. This would dispose of Black-hawk's people, for
they would have no village.  Whether the other lands were sold, did not matter.

It was done while Black-hawk and his men and women were hunting.  On their return to plant
their crops, they learned that their village and grave-yard had been sold to the whites--the
most of whom were already there.

So the white people had won out.  They in turn asked protection, of the Government, from "General
Black-hawk" and his band.  The Government listened, and ten companies of regular troops were
sent to Rock Island in a steamboat, to remove the Sacs, "dead or alive," to the west side of
the Mississippi.

A council was held with Black-hawk at Fort Armstrong, on Rock Island. Black-hawk rose to speak.
He said that the Sacs never had sold their lands; it had been a mistake, and that they were
bound to keep their village.

"Who is this Black-hawk?" retorted General Edmund P. Gaines, the commander of the troops. 
"Is he a chief?  By what right does he appear in council?"

Black-hawk wrapped his blanket around him and strode angrily out of the council room.  But
the next morning he made answer.

More troops were called, until there were twenty-five hundred.  But seeing so many soldiers
marching, Black-hawk took all his people and camped across the Mississippi, under a white flag.

After this Black-hawk was required to sign another treaty, which made him say that he had tried
to enlist the Potawatomis, Winnebagos and Kickapoos in a war against the United States.  It
did not mention the fact that for a dozen and more years the whites had been warring upon him
by seizing his lands and ploughing his fields and burning his lodges.

The paper also set him down below the other chiefs, who had left their lands.  It set him below
Keokuk, and the Fox chiefs--and this hurt him deeply.  All the Sacs and Foxes laughed at the
idea of Keokuk, and his lowly clan, being placed above Black-hawk and the Thunder clan.

In these years of trouble, the Black-hawk band had killed or abused no white settlers.  The
so-called "war," on their part, had been a war of words and fences.  Now they soon were to
take up the hatchet.

They had been expelled over the river in this year 1831 too late for planting crops.  The white
settlers declined to share with them, from the fields at the village of Saukenuk.  One night
some of the Sacs crossed "to steal roasting-ears from their own fields," as they said. They
were shot at by the settlers, and driven off.

This made more bad feeling.

Black-hawk had sent his head warrior, Nah-po-pe, or Soup, up to Canada, to ask council from
the British "father" there.  He had been "General Black-hawk" in the British army, and thought
that he deserved help.

But the United States and Great Britain had been at peace many years. The British father told
Nahpope that if the Sacs never had sold their land, of course they had a right to live upon
it.  That was all.

On the way back, Nahpope stopped to see Wa-bo-kie-shiek, or White Cloud, who was half Sac and
half Winnebago, and a great medicine-man or prophet.  He had a village at his Prophet's Town,
thirty-five miles up the Rock River, in Illinois.

White Cloud pretended to rival the Open Door of the Shawnees.  He fell into a trance, and cut
several capers, and spoke a message from the Great Spirit.  Let Black-hawk go to war.  The
Great Spirit would arouse the Winnebagos and the Potawatomis and the British, and the Americans
would be driven away!  White Cloud said this out of his own heart, which was black toward the
Americans.

He invited Black-hawk to visit him and the Winnebagos and the Potawatomis, raise a summer crop
and talk with the Great Spirit.

Much rejoiced, Nahpope hastened to tell the news to his chief.  When Keokuk heard it, he advised
Black-hawk to stay at home.  The prophet White Cloud was a mischief maker and a liar.

Black-hawk was inclined to listen, and to wait until he was more certain of the other nations
who might join with him.  But the young men of his band were hot.  Unless he did something,
Keokuk would appear to be stronger than he.  His people looked to him to get back their village
and their grave-yard.  The black mark on his face had not been wiped off.

None of Keokuk's Sacs or the Foxes would help him.  So in April of 1832 he took his men and
their families and started up the river from Fort Madison, Iowa, for Rock River.  The warriors
were on horses, the women and children in canoes.

By the last treaty that he had signed, Black-hawk had promised not to cross to the east side
of the Mississippi without the permission of the United States.  Now he said that he was going
up the Rock River, to the country of the Winnebagos, his friends, to visit among them and plant
corn and beans.

On the way up the Rock River he was ordered back, by word from General Henry Atkinson, commander
at Fort Armstrong.

Black-hawk replied that he had a right to travel peacefully, the same as white persons.  He
was going to the Winnebago country, for the summer.

The general sent another word, that if Black-hawk did not turn around, soldiers would make
him turn around.

Black-hawk replied that he was at peace and would stay at peace unless the soldiers attacked
him.  He told his men not to fire first.

Pretty soon he met some Winnebagos and Potawatomis.  They said that their nations never had
sent him any message talking war.  They wished no trouble with the United States.  Wabokieshiek
had lied.

So Black-hawk decided to give his guests a dog-feast, and then return home.  He was an old
man of sixty-five, and he was too weak to fight alone.  He was getting tired.

He had made camp one hundred miles up the Rock River, near Kishwaukee, a few miles below present
Rockford, Illinois.  By this time, early in May, all Illinois was alarmed; the regulars and
militia were on his trail.  They gathered at Dixon, about forty miles down the river from his camp.

Major Isaac Stillman took two hundred and seventy-five mounted militia, to scout for Black-hawk.
They arrived at Sycamore Creek, within eight miles of him, and did not see his camp.  But Black-hawk
knew that they were there.

He sent out three young men with a white flag, to bring the American chiefs to the camp, for
a council; then they would all go down-river together.  He sent out five young men to follow
the three, and see what happened.

Only three of the five came back.  The three with the white flag had been taken prisoners,
and the soldiers had chased the others and shot two.

Black-hawk prepared for war.  He had but forty men with him; the rest were out hunting.  Presently
here came all the white soldiers, galloping and yelling, to ride over him.  They were foolish--they
seemed to think that the Sacs would run.

But Black-hawk was old in war.  He laid an ambush--his forty warriors waited, and fired a volley,
and charged with the tomahawk and knife, and away scurried the soldiers like frightened deer.

They fled without stopping forty miles to Dixon's Ferry.  They reported that they had been
attacked by fifteen hundred savages.  They left all their camp stuff.  Fourteen soldiers had
been killed--but no Indians, except those sent by Black-hawk to treat for peace.

"Stillman's Run," the battle was called.

Black-hawk sat down to smoke a pipe to the Great Spirit, and give thanks.  Two of the flag-of-truce
party came in.  They had escaped. The third young man had been shot while in the soldiers' camp.

The Black-hawk band took the blankets and provisions left in the soldiers' camp, and proceeded
to war in earnest.  Of what use was a white flag?  They sent away their families.  Some Winnebagos,
hearing of the great victory, enlisted.

Now Black-hawk was much feared.  General Atkinson fortified his regulars and militia, at Dixon's
Ferry.  More volunteers were called for, by the governor of Illinois.  The Secretary of War
at Washington ordered one thousand additional regulars to the scene, and directed General Winfield
Scott himself, the commander of the United States army in the East, to lead the campaign.

For a little war against a few Indians there were many famous names on the white man's roll.
Among the regulars were General Scott, later the commander in the war with Mexico; Colonel
Zachary Taylor, who had defended Fort Harrison from Tecumseh--and probably Black-hawk--in the
war of 1812, and who was to be President; Lieutenant Jefferson Davis, who became president
of the Confederate States; Lieutenant Albert Sydney Johnston, who became a Confederate general;
Lieutenant Robert Anderson, who commanded Fort Sumter in 1861; and among the volunteers was
Captain Abraham Lincoln.

Black-hawk had about five hundred braves, mainly Sacs and Foxes, with a few Winnebagos and
Potawatomis; but when twenty-five hundred soldiers were chasing him through the settlements,
he stood little show.

After several skirmishes, and one or two bad defeats, his people were eating horse-flesh and
bark and roots.  To save them, he planned to go down the Wisconsin River, in southwestern Wisconsin,
and cross the Mississippi.

He put his women and children and the old men on rafts and in canoes. They started--but soldiers
fired into them, from the banks, killed some and drove the rest into the forest.  Many died
there, from hunger.

Black-hawk and his warriors, and other women and children, had cut across by land.  When they
came to the mouth of the Bad Axe River, at the Mississippi above the Wisconsin, the armed steamboat
Warrior met them.  Sioux were upon the western bank.

Black-hawk decided to surrender.  He again raised the white flag, and called out to the captain
of the Warrior that he wished a boat sent to him, so that he might go aboard and talk peace.

Perhaps the Winnebago interpreter on the Warrior did not translate the words right.  At any
rate, the captain of the Warrior asserted that Black-hawk was only trying to decoy him into
ambush.  He waited fifteen minutes, to give the Indian women and children that much time to
hide; then he opened on the white flag with canister and musketry. The first cannon shot "laid
out three."  In all, he killed twenty-three.

Black-hawk fought back, but he could not do very much against a steamboat in the river.

So he had been unable to surrender, or to cross the Mississippi.  His people were frightened,
and sick with hunger and wounds.  The next morning, August 2, he was working hard to get them
ready to cross, when General Atkinson's main army, of four hundred regulars and nine hundred
militia, fell upon him at the mouth of the Bad Axe.

The Indian women plunged into the Mississippi, with their babes on their backs--some of them
caught hold of horses' tails, to be towed faster; but the steamboat Warrior was waiting, sharp-shooters
on shore espied them, and only a few escaped, into the hands of the Sioux.

In two hours Black-hawk lost two hundred people, men and women both; the white army lost twenty-seven
in killed and wounded.

This finished Black-hawk.  He got away, but spies were on his trail, and in a few weeks two
Winnebago traitors captured him when he gave himself up at Fort Crawford, Prairie du Chien,
Wisconsin.

He expected to die.  He had turned his medicine-bag over to the Winnebago chief at the village
of La Crosse, Wisconsin--and he never got it back.

He made a speech to the Indian agent, General Joseph Street, at Prairie du Chien.  He said:

You have taken me prisoner with all my warriors.  I am much grieved, for I expected to hold
out much longer and give you more trouble before I surrendered.  I tried hard to bring you
into ambush, but your last general understands Indian fighting.

I fought hard, but your guns were well aimed.  The bullets flew like bees in the air, and whizzed
by our ears like wind through the trees in winter.  My warriors fell around me; I saw my evil
day at hand.  The sun rose dim on us in the morning, and at night it sank in a dark cloud,
and looked like a ball of fire.

That was the last sun that shone on Black-hawk.  His heart is dead.  He is now a prisoner to
the white men; they will do with him as they wish. But he can stand torture and is not afraid
of death.  He is no coward. Black-hawk is an Indian.

He has done nothing for which an Indian ought to be ashamed.  He has fought for his people,
against the white men, who have come year after year to cheat him and take away his lands.

You know the cause of our making war.  It is known to all white men. They ought to be ashamed
of it.  The white men despise the Indians and drive them from their homes.

An Indian who is as bad as the white men could not live in our nation; he would be put to death
and be eaten up by the wolves.  The white men are poor teachers; they shake us by the hand,
to make us drunk, and fool us.  We told them to let us alone, but they followed us.

Things were growing worse.  There were no deer in the forests; the springs were drying up and
our women and children had no food.  The spirits of our fathers arose and spoke to us, to avenge
our wrongs, or die.

Black-hawk is satisfied.  He will go to the land of spirits, content. He has done his duty.
His father will meet him there and praise him.

He is a true Indian and disdains to cry like a woman.  He does not care for himself.  He cares
for his nation.  They will suffer.  His country-men will not be scalped; the white men poison
the heart.  In a few years the Indians will be like the white men, and nobody can trust them.
They will need many officers to keep them in order.

Goodby, my nation.  Black-hawk tried to save you.  He drank the blood of some of the whites.
He has been stopped.  He can do no more.

After this, Black-hawk had little authority among the Sacs and Foxes. They respected him, but
they looked only to Keokuk for orders and advice.  Keokuk was made rich by the United States,
as reward; he gave out the goods and monies; he ruled, for he had followed the peace trail.

The Black-hawk prisoners were put in charge of Lieutenant Jefferson Davis, at Fort Crawford.
Then they were sent down by steamboat to Jefferson Barracks, at St. Louis.

There were Black-hawk, his two sons--Nah-se-us-kuk or Whirling Thunder, and Wa-saw-me-saw or
Roaring Thunder; White Cloud, the false prophet; Nahpope, the head brave; Ioway, Pam-a-ho or
Swimmer, No-kuk-qua or Bear's-fat, Pa-she-pa-ho or Little Stabber; and others.

They were forced to wear ball and chain.

"Had I taken the White Beaver [who was General Atkinson] prisoner, I would not have treated
a brave war chief in this manner," complained Black-hawk.

Keokuk, the successful, was kind and tried to get the prisoners freed. But they were sent on
to Washington, to see the President.  President Andrew Jackson understood Indians, and Black-hawk
was pleased with him.

"I am a man; you are another," he greeted, as he grasped President Jackson's hand.

"We did not expect to conquer the whites," he explained.  "They had too many houses, too many
men.  I took up the hatchet to avenge the injuries to my people.  Had I not done so, they would
have said, 'Black-hawk is a woman.  He is too old to be a chief.  He is no Sac.'"

From the last of April until June 4 the Black-hawk party was kept in Fortress Monroe, Virginia.
Then the Indians were started home.  They were given a long tour, to show them the power of
the United States.

They stopped at Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York, Albany, Buffalo and Detroit.  The white
people crowded to see the famous Black-hawk and to hear him speak.  He received valuable presents.
He was treated like a chief indeed, and his heart was touched.

When he arrived at Fort Armstrong again, on Rock Island, where he was to be freed, his heart
had somewhat failed.  The village of Saukenuk had long ago been leveled in ashes; he returned,
a chief without a people.

Keokuk came, to attend this council, and to receive him back into the nation.  Keokuk arrived
riding grandly in two canoes lashed side by side; a canopy over him and his wives with him,
and medals on his breast.

That was rather different from ball and chain, and old Black-hawk's head sank upon his chest.
He felt as bitter as Logan the Mingo had felt.

Before he finally settled down in a lodge built near Iowaville on the lower Des Moines River,
Iowa, he made other trips through the East. Keokuk went, also--but it was "General Black-hawk"
for whom the people clamored.

He died on October 3, 1838, at his home.  His last speech was made at a Fourth of July banquet,
at Fort Madison, Iowa, where he was a guest of honor.

"Rock River was a beautiful country.  I liked my towns, my corn-fields, and the home of my
people.  I fought for it.  It is now yours; keep it as we did.  It will bear you good crops.

"I once was a great warrior.  I am now poor.  Keokuk put me down, but do not blame him.  I
am old.  I have looked upon the Mississippi since I was a child.  I love the Great River. 
I look upon it now.  I shake hands with you, and I hope you are my friends."

These were some of his words.

He was seventy-one when he died; a spare, wrinkled old man with sharp, fiery face and flashing
eye.  He picked out his grave--at a place about half a mile from his cabin, where, he said,
he had led his Sacs in a great battle with the Iowas.

All his people, and the neighboring whites, mourned him.  He was buried sitting up, clad in
the uniform given him at Washington, by the Secretary of War.  Between his knees was placed
a cane presented to him by Henry Clay, the statesman; at his right side was placed a sword
presented to him by President Jackson.

All his best things were buried with him.  They included tobacco, food and moccasins, to last
him on a three days' journey to spirit land.

The grave was covered by a board roof.  A United States flag, and a post with his name and
age and deeds, were erected over him.  A picket fence twelve feet high was built around the grave.

He left an old wife--the only wife that he had ever taken.  He thought a great deal of her.
He rarely drank whiskey, he fought it among his people; he was opposed to torture; he had treated
prisoners kindly; he had waged war in defense, as he believed, of his own country; and altogether
he had been a good man in his Indian way.

His bones were dug up by a white doctor, and strung on a wire to decorate an office in Illinois.
Black-hawk's sons did not like this, and had the bones brought back.  They were stored in the
historical collection at Burlington, where in 1855 a fire burned them.

Black-hawk probably did not care what became of his old bones.  He was done with them.  The
white race had over-flowed the land that he loved, and the bones of his fathers, and he had
ceased fighting.

When in March, 1804, the United States took over that French Province of Louisiana which extended
from the upper Mississippi River west to the Rocky Mountains, a multitude of Indians changed
white fathers.

These Western Indians were much different from the Eastern Indians. They were long-hair Indians,
and horse Indians, accustomed to the rough buffalo chase, and a wide range over vast treeless
spaces.

To learn about them and their country, in May, 1804, there started up the Missouri River, by
boats from St. Louis, the famed Government exploring party commanded by Captain Meriwether
Lewis and Captain William Clark.

It was an army expedition: twenty-three enlisted men, a hunter, a squad of boatmen, Captain
Clark's black servant York, and a squad of other soldiers for an escort part of the way.  In
all, forty-three, under the two captains.

Their orders were, to ascend the Missouri River to its head; and, if possible, to cross the
mountains and travel westward still, to the Columbia River and its mouth at the Pacific Ocean
of the Oregon country.

No white man knew what lay before them, for no white man ever had made the trip.  The trail
was a trail in the dark.

This fall they had gone safely as far as the hewn-timber towns of the Mandan Indians, in central
North Dakota; here they wintered, and met the little Bird-woman.

Her Indian name was Sa-ca-ga-we-a, from two Minnetaree words meaning "bird" and "woman."  But
she was not a Minnetaree, who were a division of the Sioux nation, living in North Dakota near
the Mandans.  She was a Sho-sho-ni, or Snake, woman, from the distant Rocky Mountains, and
had been captured by the Minnetarees.  Between the Minnetarees of the plains and the Snakes
of the mountains there was always war.

Now at only sixteen years of age she was the wife of Toussaint Chaboneau, a leather-faced,
leather-clad French-Canadian trader living with the Mandans.  He had bought her from the Minnetarees--and
how much he paid in trade is not stated, but she was the daughter of a chief and rated a good
squaw.  Toussaint had another wife; he needed a younger one.  Therefore he bought Sacagawea,
to mend his moccasins and greet him with a smile for his heart and warm water for his tired
feet.  His old wife had grown rather cross and grunty.

Chaboneau was engaged as interpreter, this winter, and moved over to the white camp.  Sacagawea
proved to be such a cheerful, willing little woman that the captains and the men made much
of her.  And when, in February, a tiny boy arrived to her and Toussaint, there was much delight.

A baby in the camp helped to break the long dull spell of forty-below-zero weather, when two
suns shone feebly through the ice-crystaled air.

A thousand miles it was, yet, to the Rocky or Shining Mountains, by the river trail.  In the
Mandan towns, and in the American camp, Sacagawea was the only person who ever had been as
far as those mountains.  They were the home of her people, but nearly three years had passed
since she had been taken captive by the Minnetarees.

Could she still speak the Snake tongue?  Certainly!  Did she remember the trail to the country
of the Snakes?  Yes!  Was there a way across the mountains?  Yes!  Beyond some great falls
in the Missouri there was a gate, by which the Shoshonis came out of the mountains to hunt
the buffalo on the plains.  It was there that she had been captured by the Minnetarees.  Would
the Snakes be friendly to the white men?  Yes, unless they were frightened by the white men.
Would she like to go back to her own people?  Yes!  Yes!

That was great luck for Sacagawea, but it was greater luck for the two captains.  In the spring
they broke camp, and taking Chaboneau as interpreter in case that the hostile Minnetarees were
met, and little Sacagawea to spy out the land of the Snakes, and littlest Toussaint, the baby,
as a peace sign to all tribes, with a picked party of thirty-one the two captains started on,
up the swollen Missouri.

They made no mistake, in the Bird-woman.  Of course she was used to roughing it; that was the
life of an Indian woman--to do the hard work for the men, in camp and on the trail.  But Sacagawea
early showed great good sense.

Her husband Chaboneau almost capsized their canoe, by his clumsiness. She neither shrieked
nor jumped; but calmly reaching out from it, with her baby tightly held, she gathered in the
floating articles.  She saved stuff of much value, and the captains praised her.

"She's a better man than her husband," asserted the admiring soldiers.

After hard travel, fighting the swift current, the strong winds, storms of rain and sleet,
and monster grizzly bears, the expedition arrived at the Great Falls, as the Bird-woman had
promised.

She had ridden and waded and trudged, like the rest.  She had carried her baby on her back,
and had built the fires for her husband, and cooked his meals, and kept right along with the
men, and had not complained nor lagged.

At the Great Falls she was not so certain of the best route.  This was a strange country to
her, although she had known that the Falls were here.  The Shining Mountains were in sight;
the land of the Shoshonis lay yonder, to the southwest.  All right.

The captains chose what seemed to be the best route by water, and headed on, to the southwest.
Sacagawea gazed anxiously, right, left, and before.  Her heart was troubled.  She not only
much desired to find her people, for herself, but she desired to help the great captains. "The
fate of the whole party" depended upon her--and she was just a slight little Indian woman!

The Snakes did not come down, by this way.  It was too far north; it was the haunts of their
enemies the Blackfeet and the Minnetarees, of whom they were deathly afraid.  They were a timid
mountain folk, poorly armed to fight the Sioux, who had obtained guns from traders down the
Missouri.

After a time the river narrowed still more, and between rough banks poured out from a canyon
of high cliffs, black at their base and creamy yellow above.

"The Gate of the Mountains, ain't it?" passed the hopeful word. Sacagawea agreed.  She had
heard of this very "gate," where the river burst into the first plains.

"When we come to the place where the river splits into three parts, that is Shoshoni country--my
people will be there."

On forged the boats, poled and hauled and rowed, while the men's soggy moccasins rotted into
pieces, and the mosquitoes bit fiercely.  The two captains explored by land.  Hunting was forbidden,
lest the reports of the guns alarm the Snakes.

Abandoned Indian camp-sites were found, but the big-horn sheep peered curiously down from the
tops of the cliffs along the river, and that was not a good sign.  The game was too tame.

Captain Clark the Red Head took the advance, by land, to look for the Indians.  Captain Lewis,
the young Long Knife Chief, commanded the boats.  Small United States flags were erected in
the bows of each, as a peace signal.

The boats reached an open place, where the river did indeed split into several branches.

"The Three Forks," nodded Sacagawea, brightly.  "These are the Three Forks.  We are on the
right trail to the land of my people.  Now I know."

The party proceeded at top speed.  The southwest fork seemed to be the best, for boating. 
The stream shallowed.  At the next camp Sacagawea was more excited.

"She say here in dis spot is where de Snake camp was surprise' by de Minnetaree, five years
ago, an' chase' into de timber," announced Drouillard the hunter.  "De Minnetaree keel four
warrior an' capture four boy an' all de women.  She was capture' here, herself."

Hurrah! the trail was getting warm.  The canoes had to be hauled by tow-lines, with Sacagawea
proudly riding in one of them and helping to fend off with a pole.  She had not been here since
she was a girl of eleven or twelve, but she caught more landmarks.

"Dat is w'at ze Snake call ze Beaver's Head," proclaimed Chaboneau, whose feet had given out.
"Ze Snake spen' deir summer 'cross ze mountains jes' ze odder side.  She t'ink we sure to meet
some on dis side, to hunt ze boof'lo.  Mebbe furder up one leetle way."

Captain Lewis took three men and struck out, to find an Indian trail and follow it into the
mountains.

"I'll not come back until I've met with the Snakes," he asserted.

He was gone a long time.  The shallow river, full of rapids and shoals, curved and forked and
steadily shrank.  But although Sacagawea eagerly peered, and murmured to herself, no Indians
appeared.

The water was icy cold, from the snow range.  This was middle August, in extreme southwestern
Montana (a high country).  The nights were cold, too.  Game grew scarce.  Three thousand miles
had been logged off, from St. Louis.  Unless the company could get guides and horses from the
Snakes, and travel rapidly, they would be stuck, for the winter--likely enough starve; at any
rate be forced to quit.

By August 16 Captain Lewis had not returned.  Captain Clark set out afoot, with Sacagawea and
Chaboneau, to walk across country.  The Snakes simply must be found.

The toiling boats rounded a great bend, and a shout arose.

"There's Clark!  He's sighted Injuns, hasn't he?"

"So has Sacagawea!  Sure she has!  See?"

"Injuns on horseback, boys!  Hooray!"

For Captain Clark, yonder up the curve, was holding high his hand, palm front, in the peace
sign.  Sacagawea had run ahead, little Toussaint bobbing in the net on her back; she danced
as she ran; she ran back again to him, sucking her fingers.

"Dat mean she see her own peoples!" panted Cruzatte the chief boatman, who was a trapper and
trader, too, and knew Indians.  "Dere dey come, on de hoss.  Hooray!"

"Hooray!"

What a relief!  The Indians were prancing and singing.  They made the captain mount one of
the horses, and all hustled on, for an Indian camp.

By the time that the hurrying canoes arrived, Sacagawea and another woman had rushed into each
other's arms.  Presently they and the captain and Chaboneau had entered a large lodge, built
of willow branches.  The Captain Lewis squad was here, too.  The men had come down out of the
mountains, by a pass, with the Snakes.  The Snakes had been afraid of them--the first white
men ever seen by the band.  Old Drouillard the hunter had argued with them in the sign language
and with a few Shoshoni words that he knew.

It had looked like war--it had looked like peace--and it had looked like war, and death, again.
Finally, before he could persuade them, the captain had delivered over his guns, and had promised
them to be their prisoner if they did not find, down below, one of their own women acting as
the white men's guide.

But now all was well.  The token of Sacagawea saved the day.  The other woman, whom she hugged,
had been captured by the Minnetarees, at the same time with herself, and had escaped.

And the chief of the band was Sacagawea's brother.  He had mourned her as dead, but now he
and she wept together under a blanket.  Truly, he had reason to be grateful to these white
strangers who had treated her so well.

Much relieved by this good fortune at last, the captains bought horses and hired guides.  The
Snakes were very friendly; even engaged not to disturb the canoes, which were sunk with rocks
in the river to await the return trip.

There was little delay.  The mountains should be crossed at once, before winter closed the
trails.  To the surprise and delight of all the company, Sacagawea announced that she was going
with them, to see the Great Salt Water.  Somehow, she preferred the white men to her own people.
She had been weeping constantly.  Most of her relatives and old friends had died or had been
killed, during her absence.  Her new friends she loved.  They were a wonderful set, these white
men--and the Red Head, Captain Clark, was the finest of all.

Six horses had been bought.  Five were packed with the supplies; Sacagawea and little Toussaint
were mounted upon the sixth, and the whole company, escorted by the Snakes, marched over the
pass to Chief Ca-me-ah-wait's principal camp.

From there, with twenty-seven horses and one mule, with the happy Bird-woman and the beady-eyed
Toussaint, the two captains and their men took the trail for the Great Salt Water, one thousand
miles toward the setting sun.  Ah, but a tough trail that proved, across the Bitter Root Mountains;
all up and down, with scarcely a level spot to sleep on; with the snow to the horses' bellies
and the men's thighs; with the game failing, until even a horse's head was treasured as a tidbit.

And the Bird-woman, riding in the exhausted file, never complained, but kept her eyes fixed
to the low country and the big river and the Great Salt Water.

Once, in the midst of starvation, from her dress she fished out a small piece of bread that
she had carried clear from the Mandan towns.  She gave it to Captain Clark, that he might eat
it.  A brave and faithful heart had Sacagawea.

Struggling down out of the mountains, at the end of September, they changed to canoes.  The
Pierced Noses, or Nez Percés Indians, were friendly; and now, on to the Columbia and thence
on to the sea, Sacagawea was the sure charm.  For when the tribes saw the strange white warriors,
they said, "This cannot be a war party.  They have a squaw and a papoose.  We will meet with them."

That winter was spent a few miles back from the Pacific, near the mouth of the Columbia River
in present Washington.

Only once did the Bird-woman complain.  The ocean was out of sight from the camp.  Chaboneau,
her husband, seemed to think that she was made for only work, work, work, cooking and mending
and tending baby.

"You stay by ze lodge fire.  Dat is place for womans," he rebuked. Whereupon Sacagawea took
the bit in her teeth (a very unusual thing for a squaw to do) and went straight to Captain
Clark, her friend.

"What is the matter, Sacagawea?"

She had been crying again.

"I come a long way, capitin.  I carry my baby, I cold, hungry, wet, seeck, I come an' I no
care.  I show you trail; I say 'Snake peoples here,' an' you find Snakes.  You get hosses,
food, guide.  When Indians see me an' my Toussaint, dey say 'Dis no war party,' an' dey kind
to you.  When you get hungry for bread, I gif you one leetle piece dat I carry all de way from
Mandan town.  I try to be good woman.  I work hard, same as mens.  Now I been here all dis
time, near de salt water dat I trabble many days to see--an' I not see it yet. My male ancestors,
so far as I can trace them, were men of the woods, hunters, trappers, herb gatherers. My mother
was from the country, educated for a teacher.

She had the most inexorable will power of any woman I ever have known. From my father I inherited
my love for muck on my boots, resin in my nostrils, the long trail,
the camp fire, forest sounds and silences in my soul.

From my mother I learned to read good books, to study subjects that puzzled me, to tell the
truth, to keep my soul and body clean, and to pursue with courage the thing to which I set my
hand.

"There was not money enough to educate me as she would; together we learned to find it in the
forest. In early days we sold ferns and wild flowers to city people,
harvested the sap of the maples in spring, and the nut crop of the
fall.

Later, as we wanted more, we trapped for skins, and collected herbs for the drug stores. This
opened to me a field I was peculiarly fitted to enter. I knew woodcraft instinctively, I had
the location of every herb, root, bark, and seed that will endure my climate; I had the determination
to stick to my job, the right books to assist me, and my mother's
invincible will power to uphold me where I wavered.

"As I look into your faces, men, I am struck with the astounding thought that some woman bore
the cold sweat and pain of labour to give life to each of you.

I hope few of you prolonged that agony as I did. It was in the heart of my mother to make me
physically clean, and to that end she sent me daily into the lake, so long as it was not ice
covered, and put me at exercises intended to bring full strength
to every sinew and fibre of my body.

It was in her heart to make me morally clean, so she took me to nature and drilled me in its
forces and its methods of reproducing life according to the law. Her work was good to a point that
all men will recognize.

From there on, for a few years, she held me, not because I was man enough to stand, but because
she was woman enough to support me.

Without her no doubt I would have broken the oath I took; with her I won the victory and reached
years of manhood and self-control as she would have had me. The struggle wore her out at half
a lifetime, but as a tribute to her memory I cannot face a body of men having your opportunities
without telling you that what was possible to her and to me is possible
to all mothers and men.

If she is above and hears me perhaps it will recompense some of her shortened years if she
knows I am pleading with you, as men having the greatest influence of any living, to tell and
to teach the young that a clean life is possible to them. The next time any of you are called upon
to address a body of men tell them to learn for themselves and to teach their sons, and to hold
them at the critical hour, even by sweat and blood, to a clean life; for in this way only can feeble-minded
homes, almshouses, and the scarlet woman be abolished.

In this way only can men arise to full physical and mental force, and become the fathers of a
race to whom the struggle for clean manhood will not be the battle it is with us.

"By the distorted faces, by the misshapen bodies, by marks of degeneracy, recognizable to your practised
eyes everywhere on the streets, by the agony of the mother who bore you, and later wept over you,
I conjure you men to live up to your high and holy privilege, and
tell all men that they can be clean, if they will.

This in memory of the mother who shortened her days to make me a moral man.
  Another statue
has been erected in the state capitol at Bismarck, North Dakota.

So, although all the wages went to her husband, she knows that the white people of the great
United States remember the loving services of the brave little Bird-woman, who without the
promise of pay, helped carry the Flag to the Pacific.

Young Captain Lewis the Long Knife Chief, and stout Captain Clark the Red Head, who with their
exploring party wintered among the Mandans in 1804-1805, and enlisted the Snake Bird-woman
as guide, were the first white men to write a clear account of the curious Mandans; but they
did not tell the half.

For a curious people indeed were these Mandans, dwelling in two villages on the Missouri River
above present Washburn in central North Dakota.

They were polite, hospitable, and brave.  Their towns were defended by ditches and loose timber
palisades, not tight like those of the Iroquois and Hurons.  Their houses were circular; of
an earthern floor sunk two feet, and heavy six-foot logs set on end inside the edge of it,
with a roof of timbers, woven willow, and thick mud-plaster; with a sunken fire-place under
a hole in the center of the roof, and with bunks, screened by elk-hides or buffalo-robes, along
the walls.

These houses were large enough to shelter twenty to forty persons; the roofs were favorite
loafing spots, for men, women, and dogs.

The Mandans formed a happy, talkative people, of strange appearance, but exceedingly clean,
fond of bathing, either in the river or in wicker tubs.  Their hair was heavy, sometimes reached
to the ground, and was black, brown, and frequently gray or pure white even on the young. 
Their eyes were likely to be hazel, blue or gray, instead of black; their skin almost white.
They made glassy clay vases and bowls, and remarkable blue glass beads.  In fact, they seemed
to have white manners, white arts, and white blood.  Rumor asserted that they were partly Welsh,
descended from the lost colony of the Welsh prince, Madoc.

Now this Madoc, a prince of the early Welsh people, set sail about the year 1180, with ten
ships, to found a colony in a new Western continent that he claimed to have discovered.

He never was heard from.  He and his ten shiploads vanished.  But if he reached North America,
and traveled inland, to be swallowed up amidst the red blood, the strange Mandans may have
been the proof of his arrival.

Their round boats, of bowl-like wicker-work covered with hide, and their way of dipping the
paddle from the front instead of from the rear, were exactly the Welsh method of canoe travel.

In the days of Mah-to-toh-pa the Mandans numbered two thousand, in two towns allied with the
towns of the Minnetarees.  They were beset by the tough, winter-traveling Assiniboins to the
north, and by the treacherous Arikarees and the bold Sioux to the south.  Therefore when in
1833 the wandering artist George Catlin of Pennsylvania, who spent eight years painting Indians
in their homes all the way from Florida to the Rocky Mountains, made a long stay among the
Mandans, they rejoiced him by their brave tales as well as with their curious habits.

According to all the reports, the "bravest of the braves" in the Mandan towns was Mahtotohpa;
second chief by rank, but first of all by deeds. "Free, generous, elegant, and gentlemanly
in his deportment--handsome, brave and valiant," says Artist Catlin.  Such words speak well
for Four Bears, but not a bit too well.

Before he arrived at the Artist Catlin lodge to have his portrait painted, the warning ran
ahead of him: "Mahtotohpa is coming in full dress!"  He was escorted by a great throng of admiring
women and children.  Now it was twelve o'clock noon, and he had been since early morning getting
ready, so as to appear as befitted a noble chief.

His dress was complete: shirt, leggins, moccasins, head-dress, necklace, belt, robe, medicine-bag,
tobacco sack, pipe, quiver, bow, knife, lance, shield, tomahawk and war-club.  And as he proudly
stood erect, waiting, he made a splendid sight.

His shirt was mountain-sheep skins, one before, one behind, sewed together at their edges.
They were embroidered with porcupine quills brightly dyed, and fringed with the black scalp-locks
of the enemies whom he had slain in combat, and tasseled with ermine tails.  They were pictured
with his deeds, painted in sign language.

The leggins were of finely dressed deer-skin, worked with the porcupine quills, fringed with
the scalp-locks, and fitting tightly from moccasins to thighs.

The moccasins were of buck-skin, armored with the dyed quills.

The head-dress was a crest of two polished buffalo horns set in a thick mat of ermine, from
which fell clear to his heels a ridgy tail of countless eagle plumes also set in the ermine fur.

The necklace was of fifty grizzly-bear claws, strung from otter skin.

The belt was of tanned buck-skin, supporting tomahawk and broad-bladed scalping knife with
elk-horn haft.

The robe slung from his shoulders like a Roman toga was the softened hide of a young buffalo
bull worn fur side in; and on the white skin side all the battles of his life had been painted.

The medicine-bag was a beaver skin, ornamented with hawk-bills and ermine.  He held it in his
right hand.

His tobacco sack was of otter skin decorated with porcupine quills.  In it were dried red-willow
bark, flint and steel, and tinder.

His pipe was of curiously carved red pipe-stone from the peace quarries in present Minnesota.
The stem was ash, three feet long, wound with porcupine quills to form pictures of men and
animals; decorated with wood-peckers' skins and heads, and the hair of the white buffalo's
tail.  It was half painted red, and notched for the years of his life.

His quiver was of panther skin and filled with arrows, flint pointed and steel pointed, and
some bloody.

His bow was of strips of elk-horn polished white, cemented with glue of buffalo hoof, and backed
with deer sinews to give it spring.  Three months had been required to make it.  There was
none better.

His lance had a deadly two-edge steel blade, stained with the dried blood of Sioux and Arikaree
and Cheyenne and Assiniboin.  The six-foot ashen shaft was strung with eagle feathers.

His shield was the hide from a buffalo's neck, hardened with hoof glue. Its center was a pole-cat
skin; its edges were fringed with eagle feathers and antelope hoofs that rattled.

His battle-axe was of hammered iron blade and skull-pecker, with ash handle four feet long
and deer-sinew grip.  Eagle feathers and fur tufts decorated it.

His war-club was a round stone wrapped in raw-hide at the end of a cow-tail, like a policeman's
billy.

After his portrait was painted, Mahtotohpa spread out his wonderful robe, and told the stories
of the twelve battles and the fourteen scalps pictured on it by his own hand; and these stories
included that of his Arikaree lance, and Cheyenne knife.

The lance story came about in this way.  In the shaft of the lance, near the blade, there had
been set an antelope prong; and when Mahtotohpa posed for his portrait, with the butt of the
lance proudly planted on the ground, he carefully balanced an eagle feather across this prong.

"Do not omit to paint that feather exactly as it is," he said, "and the spot of blood upon
it.  It is great medicine, and belongs to the Great Spirit, not to me.  I pulled it from the
wound of an enemy."

"Why do you not tie it to the lance, then?"

"Hush!" rebuked Mahtotohpa.  "If the Great Spirit had wished it to be tied on, it would never
have come off."

Whereupon, presently, he told the story of the mighty lance.  This had been the lance of a
famous Arikaree warrior, Won-ga-tap.  Some years back, maybe seven or eight, the Mandans and
the Arikarees had met on horses near the Mandan towns, and had fought.  The Mandans chased
the Arikarees, but after the chase the brother of Mahtotohpa did not come in.

Several days passed; and when Mahtotohpa himself found his brother, it was only the body, scalped
and cut and pierced with an arrow, and fastened through the heart to the prairie by the lance
of Won-ga-tap.

Many in the village recognized that as the lance of Won-ga-tap. Mahtotohpa did not clean it
of its blood, but held it aloft before all the village and swore that he would clean it only
with the blood of Wongatap the Arikaree.

He sent a challenge to the Arikarees; and for four years he waited, keeping the lance and hoping
to use it as he had promised.  Finally his heart had grown so sore that he was bursting; and
again holding the lance up before the village, he made a speech.

"Mahtotohpa is going.  Let nobody speak his name, or ask where he is, or try to seek him. 
He will return with fresh blood on this lance, or he will not return at all."

He set out alone, on foot, like Piskaret, the Adirondack, had set out in his great adventure
against the Iroquois.  By night journeys he traveled two hundred miles, living on the parched
corn in his pouch, until he was seven days hungry when at last he came to the Arikaree town
where the lodge of Wongatap was located.

He knew the village well, for there had been brief periods when the Mandans and the Arikarees
were at peace; besides, it was a warrior's business to know an enemy's lodges.

The Arikaree towns were much the same as the Mandan towns.  Now Mahtotohpa lay outside and
watched, until at dusk he might slip through between the pickets, and seek the lodge of Wongatap.
He was enveloped in a buffalo robe, covering his head, so that he would be taken for an Arikaree.

He peeped through a crack in the Wongatap lodge and saw that his enemy was getting ready for
bed.  There he was, Wongatap himself, sitting with his wife in the fire-light, and smoking
his last pipe.  Pretty soon, as the fire flickered out, he rapped the ashes from his pipe,
his wife raked the coals of the fire together, until morning; and now they two crawled into
their bunk.

Hotly grasping his lance, and surrounded by the enemy, Mahtotohpa delayed a little space; then
he arose and boldly stalked into the lodge and sat by the fire.

Over the coals was hanging a pot of cooked meat; beside the fire were the pipe and the pouch
of red-willow smoking tobacco, just as left by Wongatap.

Amidst the dusk Mahtotohpa ate well of the cooked meat; and filling the pipe, smoked calmly,
half lying down, on one elbow.

"Who is that man, who enters our lodge and eats of our food and smokes of our tobacco?" he
heard Wongatap's wife ask.

"It is no matter," Wongatap replied.  "If he is hungry, let him eat."

That was right.  By Indian law a person in need may enter any lodge, and eat, and no questions
shall be asked until he has finished.

Mahtotohpa's heart almost failed him.  Had that not been the killer of his brother, he would
only have left a challenge, and gone away.  But he thought of his brother, and his vows, and
his heart closed again.

When his pipe was smoked out, he laid it aside, and gently stirred the fire with the toe of
his moccasin, for more light.  He dared to wait no longer.  On a sudden he grasped his lance
with both hands, sprang up and drove it through the body of Wongatap, in the bunk.

With his knife he instantly snatched off the scalp.  Then he uttered the Mandan scalp-halloo,
and dived for the door.  There he paused, for just a second, to look back, that the squaw might
see his face--and in the glimmer of fire-light he noted a feather from the lance sticking in
the hole in Wongatap's side.

So back he darted, plucked the feather, and carrying it in his left hand, that the Great Spirit
might help him, he ran hard.  Wongatap's wife was shrieking; all the village heard and answered,
and the warriors streamed out of the lodges.

The whole night Mahtotohpa ran, while the Arikarees vainly searched for his trail.  This day
he hid, in the brush along the Missouri River. The next night he ran again; and on the sixth
morning he panted into the Mandan town, with the dried blood of Wongatap on his lance's blade
and the stiffened scalp of Wongatap hanging to its handle.

So that was why he cherished the lance, and that was why he considered the loose eagle's feather
to be a strong medicine from the Great Spirit.

But this was only Number Six, in the twelve recorded deeds of Four Bears.

His next-biggest deed was as follows, and it is bigger, according to white man's way of thinking.
By that deed he won his knife.

Early one morning one hundred and fifty Cheyenne warriors attacked the Mandan town.  They took
a scalp and many horses before they rode away. The Mandans had been surprised; but Mahtotohpa
rallied fifty warriors and pursued.

The fifty warriors led by Mahtotohpa pursued for a day and half a day. At noon they sighted
the Cheyennes driving the stolen horses; but the Cheyennes were so numerous that the Mandan
warriors lost their hearts and wished to turn back.

Not so, Mahtotohpa!  He galloped forward alone; he planted his lance in the earth, to the full
length of the blade; and making a circle around it with his horse he tore from his clothing
a strip of red cloth and hung that to the lance shaft, for a banner.

"If you are cowards, you may go back to the women," he called to his men.  "I stay here, where
my lance is firm in the ground."

His men were ashamed, and hesitated.  Now the Cheyennes had turned and were coming for battle.
Their chief saw the planted lance of Mahtotohpa, and Mahtotohpa waiting beside it, and he galloped
forward, alone, on his white horse.

"Who is it that has stuck down his lance, and defies the Cheyennes?" he shouted.

"I am Mahtotohpa."

"That is good.  Mahtotohpa is a chief.  Does he dare to fight?"

"Is this a chief who speaks to Mahtotohpa?"

"I wear scalps at my horse's bit, and the eagle's feathers."

"You have said enough," replied Mahtotohpa.  "Come.  Let us meet."

Forward hammered the Cheyenne chief, riding splendidly in circles, until he dashed in and planted
his lance, also, at the side of Mahtotohpa's lance.  That was his answer.

They each drew off a little way, while the Mandan warriors and the Cheyenne warriors gazed
expectant.  Then they charged like knights in a tournament, and shot at the same moment with
their guns.  After they had passed each other, and had wheeled, Mahtotohpa held up his powder-horn.
The Cheyenne's bullet had smashed it, so that the powder had flowed out.

Having shown, Mahtotohpa flung away his horn, threw his gun to the ground, and setting his
buffalo-hide shield upon his left arm, deliberately strung his bow and placed an arrow upon
the string.

The Cheyenne chief was a mighty warrior.  He likewise cast aside his powder-horn and gun, adjusted
his painted shield, prepared bow and arrow.  Again they charged.  They circled swiftly about
each other, performing many clever feats of horsemanship, while their stout bows twanged so
fast that the arrows crisscrossed like darting bees.

Some thudded into the thick shields, and the shields bristled with the feathered ends.  Some
found legs and arms--but that mattered little. Now Mahtotohpa's horse reeled and fell, an arrow
in his heart. Mahtotohpa sprang nimbly off.  And off from his own horse sprang the Cheyenne
chief, that he might not have the advantage.

They plied their bows, on foot.  Soon the brave Cheyenne stripped his quiver from his left
shoulder and flourished it.  It was empty.  He tossed it away, and tossed away bow and shield.
Then he drew his knife.

"Ai!" responded Mahtotohpa, gladly; and ridding himself of shield and quiver he rushed forward,
feeling for his knife, too.

But his knife was not in his belt.  He had lost it, or left it at home! Hah!  He could not
stop--they had come together--the Cheyenne was upon him.  So he fought with his bow.  He struck
aside the Cheyenne's thrust, and hit him over the head and knocked him down.  They grappled.
It was a terrible fight.

Mahtotohpa clutched for the knife, and the sharp blade was wrenched through his hand, cutting
to the bone.  The Cheyenne stabbed him many times, and many times Mahtotohpa clutched the knife
blade again, before he could tear the haft from the Cheyenne's fingers.

But suddenly he succeeded, and the Cheyenne died.  The warriors of both parties had formed
a circle close about, watching.  Mahtotohpa staggered up, with the Cheyenne's scalp and knife,
and gave the kill whoop--and thus victory rested with the Mandans.

That was Mahtotohpa's most famous battle.  In another battle he got his name, Four Bears. 
The Assiniboins had put all his warriors to flight; but he stood his ground, and shot his gun
and killed an Assiniboin, and charged with lance and shield, and made them run off.  He took
sixty horses, besides the scalp.  After this he was called Four Bears, because the Assiniboins
said that he charged "like four bears in one."

His worst wound he received from the Sioux.  They shot an arrow clear through his body, so
that the arrow continued on, dropping blood.  But he lashed his horse forward, against them,
and won another victory.

Such honorable scars he kept covered with red paint, that all who saw might read.

These stories, and others, as pictured by the robe, Mahtotohpa told to Artist Catlin, while
Indian trader James Kipp translated the words, and Four Bears acted out the scenes; and they
three sat upon the robe itself.

The Cheyenne chief's knife he gave to Artist Catlin.  He also made a copy of the pictures,
on another robe, and the knife and the second robe were sent to the Catlin Indian gallery,
at Washington, where they doubtless may be seen at this day.

Mahtotohpa's end came to him as follows:

In the summer of 1837, a great death attacked the Mandan towns.  It was the small pox.  The
Sioux hedged the towns so closely that there was no escape into the prairie.  The Mandan men,
women and children, thus herded together, died by hundreds.

Mahtotohpa was among the last left.  He witnessed all his family and friends stretched cold
and lifeless, and he decided to try a sacrifice to the anger of the Great Spirit.

So he dragged his wives and children together and covered them decently with buffalo robes.
Then he went out to a little hill, and laid himself down, with a vow not to eat or drink, if
the Great Spirit would stay the plague.

On the sixth day he was very weak; but he crept back to his lodge, and again laid himself down,
in a robe, beside his family.  And on the ninth day, he, too, died.

However, the plague was not stayed for many days.  Of the sixteen hundred Mandans in the two
towns, only thirty-one remained alive; of all the Mandan nation there were scarce above one
hundred; and today they number about one hundred and fifty.

But as the Pierced Noses this nation in the far Northwest was known. They were members of the
Sha-hap-ti-an family of North Americans--a family not so large as the Algonquian, Siouan, Shoshonean
and several other families, yet important.

Their home was the valley and river country of western Idaho, and the near sections of Oregon
and Washington.  The two captains, Lewis and Clark, were well treated by them along the great
Snake River, above the entrance to the greater Columbia.

They were a small Indian; a horse Indian who lived on buffalo as well as fish, and scorned
to eat dog like the Sioux; a brave fighting Indian; and withal a very honest, wise-minded Indian,
whose boast, up to 1877, was that they had never shed the white man's blood.

They used canoes, but they used horses more.  Horses were their wealth. They raised horses
by the thousand, and the finest of horses these were.  A fat colt was good meat, but without
horses they could not hunt the buffalo and the buffalo supplied stronger meat.

Once a year, when the grass had greened in the spring, they traveled eastward, across the Rocky
Mountains by the Pierced Nose Trail-to-the-buffalo, and hunted upon the Missouri River plains,
in the country of their enemies the Blackfeet.

The Blackfeet, in turn, sought them out, west of the mountains, to steal their horses.  With
the Blackfeet and the Sioux, and sometimes with the Snakes, they fought many a battle; and
when they had anything of a show, they won out.  It took numbers to whip a Pierced Nose warrior.
Like most peace-lovers, he made the hardest kind of a fighter.

The early whites in the Northwest had nothing but praise for the Pierced Nose Indians.  The
trapper who married a Pierced Nose woman thought that he was lucky.  She would be a good wife
for him--gentle, neat and always busy.  Besides, as a rule the Nez Percés women were better
looking than the general run of Indian women.

The early fur-hunters and explorers found that the Pierced Noses were very religious, in a
way akin to the Christian way.  They did not eat, drink nor sleep without first giving thanks
to God.  They had one day each week, like Sunday, when they did not hunt or fish or work, but
listened to talks by their priests or medicine-men.

It was said that they had been taught first by a Christian Iroquois Indian, who in 1816 came
in from Canada and told them the things that he had been told by the French priests.  At any
rate, when the Roman Catholic priests themselves arrived to live among them, these Pierced
Noses already had learned a great deal.  They were anxious to learn more.

However, before the missionaries of any church visited them, the Pierced Noses tried to learn
more, by themselves.  In particular, they wanted a copy of the Book of Heaven.  And what started
them on the trail of the Book of Heaven, was this:

Among the leaders of white fur-hunters in beaver-trapping days in the west, there was Trapper-Captain
Jedediah S. Smith--the Knight in Buckskin.  This Captain Jedediah Smith was fearless and upright.
Hunting beaver, he traveled far and wide, from the Missouri River to California, and from New
Mexico to the Columbia, protected only by his rifle and his Bible.

Wherever he carried his rifle, he carried his Bible; used them both, and no man but that respected
him.  The Comanches of the Southwest finally killed him, in 1831, when fighting alone against
great odds he died a real hero's death.

He had spent the winter of 1824-1825 in the Pierced Noses' country.  Of course he told them
much about the white man's religion.  They saw him frequently reading in his little, black-leather
book, which, they said, must be the White Man's Book of Heaven.  He would not sell them the
book, for any amount of horses or beaver skins.  When he had left, they took counsel together
and decided that they should get such a book.

Twice they sent into the East for it; and no word came back.  But the Pierced Noses did not
give up.  They were still without the wonderful Book of Heaven which, had said Captain Jedediah
Smith the trapper, guided the white men on the straight trail to the Great Spirit above.

In the early part of 1832 they called a council of the nation, and chose four men, to set out,
again, for the big, unknown village where dwelt the Red Head Chief, and where, they hoped,
a copy of the Book of Heaven might be found.

The snows had scarcely melted when the four men started.  Two of them were old and wise; their
names are not written.  Two of them were young and strong; their names were Rabbit-skin Leggins
and No-horns-on-his-head.

A long, long, dangerous road lay before them: three thousand miles, across the mountains into
the Blackfeet country, and across the plains guarded by the Blackfeet and the Sioux and other
hungry people as bad.

But they got through all right, for they were clever and in earnest. They arrived at St. Louis
in the summer.

St. Louis was then nothing like the St. Louis of today; but to the four strangers from the
Columbia River basin it was amazingly large.  Never had they dreamed of seeing so many white
people.  No one spoke their tongue; still there were trappers and Missouri River boatmen who
understood signs, and by the sign language they inquired for the Red Head Chief.

The kind-hearted Governor William Clark was glad to greet them.  Their fathers, almost thirty
years before, had helped him and Captain Lewis the Long Knife; he remembered the two old men
when they were young. The Indians of the West might always depend upon their friend the Red Head.

So he took charge of the four Pierced Noses, and entertained them.  He showed them the sights
of the white man's big village beside the big rivers.  They were entertained by banquets and
balls and the theatre. They went to services in the Roman Catholic church, where the white
people worshipped--for Governor Clark was a Catholic.

And they saw copies of the Book of Heaven--the Roman Catholic testament, and the Bible: but
the books did not speak their language!

In all the white man's village there was no one who might read from the Book, in their own
language.

After a few months they began to despair.  The food of the white man and the close air of the
lodges made them ill.  The two old men died. Rabbit-skin Leggins and No-horns-on-his-head were
homesick for their country beyond the mountains.  In the winter they prepared to go.

A farewell banquet was given to them, but they were tired of banquets. They wanted a Book of
Heaven that could talk to them. No-horns-on-his-head delivered a speech, as best he might,
in sign language and broken English, through an interpreter.

I have come to you over the trail of many moons from the setting sun. You were the friends
of my fathers, who have all gone the long way.

I came with an eye partly open for my people, who sit in darkness; I go back with both eyes
closed.  How can I go back blind, to my blind people?  I made my way to you with strong arms
through many enemies and strange lands that I might carry back much to them.  I go back with
both arms broken and empty.

Two fathers came with us; they were the braves of many winters and wars.  We leave them asleep
here by your great waters and wigwams. They were tired in many moons and their moccasins wore out.

My people sent me to get the "White Man's Book of Heaven."  You took me to where you allow
your women to dance as we do not ours, and the book was not there.  You took me to where they
worship the Great Spirit with candles, and the book was not there.  You showed me images of
the good spirits and the picture of the good land beyond, but the book was not among them to
tell us the way.

I am going back the long and sad trail to my people in the dark land. You make my feet heavy
with gifts and my moccasins will grow old carrying them, yet the book is not among them.  When
I tell my poor blind people, after one more snow, in the big council, that I did not bring
the book, no word will be spoken by our old men or by our young braves.  One by one they will
rise and go out in silence.

My people will die in darkness, and they will go a long path to other hunting grounds.  No
white man will go with them, and no White Man's Book make the way plain.  I have no more words.

They left.  Rabbit-skin Leggins reached his people; No-horns-on-his-head fell upon the trail
and died.

But his words lived.  As translated into English, they were printed in Eastern papers, and
aroused great desire among the churches to give them the right answer.  Should these Indians
beyond the mountains remain in darkness?  No!

Missionaries were called for, to carry the Book and the Word to the Columbia River.  In the
spring of 1834 the first party, of four Methodists, set out; others followed, the next year;
soon the Roman Catholic church sent its Black Robes; and the Pierced Noses and their kin the
Flatheads were made glad.

Not in vain had their warriors died, while seeking the road to the white man's heaven.  Today
there are in the United States about one thousand of them.  But when they were a free and powerful
people they numbered as high as ten thousand, and ranged far--from the Missouri River in northern
North Dakota and northern Montana clear into Canada, above.

This cold, high country of vast plains made them hardy and roaming.  In their proud bearing
and good size they resembled the Dakota Sioux, but with the Sioux they had little to do, except
in war.  They were at war with the Mandans also, and other nations to the south.  In the north
they mingled with the Ojibwas or Chippewa people who had journeyed westward into Canada.  The
Ojibwas had given them their name, As-si-i-bo-in, meaning "They-cook-with-stones."

The Assiniboins were horse Indians and buffalo hunters.  They had two peculiar customs.  They
did cook their meat with stones, just as the Chippewas said.  Instead of using kettles, they
used holes.  They dug a hole about the size of a large kettle; then they pressed a square of
raw buffalo-hide into it, for a lining.  This they filled with water; they put their meat in,
and heating stones, dropped them in, too, until the water was boiling.

Their other peculiarity lay in their style of hair.  The longer the hair, the better.  They
divided it into strands, and plastered the strands with a paste of red earth and hoof glue,
in sections of an inch or two.

When the hair did not grow long enough to suit, they spliced it by gluing on other hair, sometimes
horse-hair, until it reached the ground.

In the year 1831 Wi-jun-jon, or Pigeon's-egg Head, was a leading young warrior among the long-haired
Assiniboins.  It was a custom of those days to have chiefs and warriors from the various Indian
tribes sent to Washington, to talk with their White Father and see how the Americans lived.

This was supposed to teach the Indians the value of white man's ways, and to show them how
useless was war with the white race.

The Assiniboins were still a wild people.  They were located so far from St. Louis that they
knew nothing about white man ways, except such as they noticed at the fur-trading posts--and
here the ways were mixed with Indian ways.

So in the fall of this year Major J. F. A. Sanborn, the Indian agent at the American Fur Company's
trading-post of Fort Union, where on the border between North Dakota and Montana the Yellowstone
River empties into the Missouri River, decided to take a party of Indians to Washington.

The Assiniboins, the Cheyennes, the Blackfeet, the Crows--they all came to Fort Union, to trade
their furs for powder, lead, sugar and blankets.

Major Sanborn asked the Assiniboins for a warrior.  They appointed Wijunjon and another.

Now, this was to be a long journey, among strangers.  To be sure, from the Mandans, down-river,
old Sha-ha-ka, or White Head, had made the trip, in 1806, when the Red Head Chief and the Long
Knife Chief were bound home from the salty water; and he had returned unharmed.  Others had
gone since, from the upper Missouri, and others had died; Sha-ha-ka himself had almost been
killed by the Sioux.

Nobody had gone yet, from as far away as the Assiniboin country; therefore young Wijunjon feared,
but was brave.  He bade his wife, Chin-cha-pee, or Fire-bug-that-creeps, and his little children
goodby, and with the other Assiniboin and chiefs from the Blackfeet and Crows, set out on a
fur company flatboat under protection of Major Sanborn. The Assiniboin women on the shore wept
and wailed.  His people scarcely expected to see him again.

It was one thousand miles by river through the enemies of his nation, thence on to the great
village of St. Louis; but he passed in safety. And when he began to see the first smaller villages
of the Americans in Missouri, Wijunjon started in to count the houses, so that he might tell
his people.

He had promised to report everything.

He commenced to count by making notches in his pipe stem--one notch for every lodge.  The cabins
became thicker, along the river banks, and his comrade needs must call off the lodges while
he made the notches.  Soon there was no more space on the pipe stem, and Wijunjon changed to
his war club.  Speedily he had filled this also.

Luckily, the barge tied up at the shore, while dinner was cooked.  This gave him chance to
cut a long willow stick, which surely would be enough.

In fact, so certain he was that the end of the white man's lodges must be close before them,
that he worked hard to recut the pipe stem notches and the war club notches, in his willow
stick, to have all together.  But this very day he had filled the willow stick, and the lodges
before them seemed more numerous than those behind!

Ere they arrived in sight of St. Louis itself, he and his comrade had an arm-load of willow
sticks--all filled with notches.  And here was St. Louis!  How many people?  Fifteen thousand!
How many lodges? Thousands of lodges!

Pigeon's-egg Head pitched the bundle of willow sticks over-board.  His knife was worn out,
and his hand and brain were tired.

At St. Louis he stood for his portrait, painted by the same Artist Catlin who the next year,
in the Mandan towns, listened to the hero tales of Mah-to-toh-pa.  He was a great man at painting
Indians, this Artist Catlin.

Wijunjon was somewhat confused by so many sounds and sights, but he made a fine figure of a
chief--in his mountain-goat skin leggins and shirt, decorated with porcupine quills, and with
scalp locks from his enemies; his long plaited hair, which reached to the ground; his war bonnet
of eagles' plumes; his buffalo-hide robe, painted with the battles of his career; his beautiful
moccasins; and his quiver and bow and bull-neck shield.

Having had his portrait painted, he continued on the long trail, of two thousand more miles
by water and by stage, to Washington.  And as every mile of it was amidst still more lodges
of the white man, he soon saw that all the willow sticks of the Missouri River could not have
counted their numbers.

This winter Wijunjon and his companions had a wonderful time among the white men.  The Pigeon's-egg
Head was the foremost.  He was the first to shake the hand of the Great White Father.  He declined
nothing.  The sights of Washington, Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York--he inspected them all.
He scarcely rested, night or day.  He learned so much that when, in the spring of 1832, he
turned homeward, he was filled to bursting.

At St. Louis the first "through" steamboat, the Yellowstone, was waiting to ascend to Fort
Union and the Assiniboin country.  Artist Catlin was aboard.  This was to be his first trip, also.

The steamboat Yellowstone made a huge sensation, as it ploughed the thick muddy current of
the Missouri, frightening the Indians and buffalo along the shores.

It moved without sweeps--it nosed for the deepest channels--and the Indians called it "Big-medicine-canoe-with-eyes."
It spoke with its guns, and belched much smoke--and they called it "Big Thunder-canoe."

But Wijunjon feared not at all.  He was used to thunder-canoes, now; and he had seen many great
sights, back there in the villages of the white men.  In fact, he was a sight, himself, for
on the way up he had changed his clothes, that his people might know hint for a wide traveler.

Gone were his fringed and quilled goat-skin leggins and shirt; gone his war bonnet and painted
robe and handsome moccasins, his bow and quiver and shield.

Instead, he wore a badly fitting colonel's uniform, of the United States Army, given to him
by the Great White Father: wrinkled trousers and coat of bright blue, with gilt epaulets upon
the shoulders, and a stiff collar that reached above his ears.  Atop his long painted hair
there was settled, to the coat collar, a stove-pipe hat, with a silver-braid band and a red
wool plume two feet high.  His feet were squeezed into high-heeled military boots, of shiny
leather.  Around his neck was a tight black stock, or collar.  Around his waist was a red sash.
Upon his hands were loose white cotton gloves.  Upon his chest, and the ruffles of a white
shirt, dangled a silver medal, on a blue ribbon.  Hung by a belt across one shoulder, at his
log dangled a huge broad-sword.  In one hand he carried a blue umbrella, in the other a fan,
and in his arms a keg of rum.

Thus Wijunjon, the big brave, proudly strode the deck of the steamer Yellowstone, and impatiently
looked forward to the moment when he might step off, among his people.

The moment came.  Two thousand Indians had gathered on the prairie at Fort Union, to greet
the thunder-canoe and the returning travelers. Wijunjon led the procession down the gang-plank.

It was not Indian etiquet to make an ado over the return.  Wijunjon was roundly eyed, but nobody
spoke to him.  His wife, the Fire-bug-that-creeps, was here; so were his children, who scarcely
knew him; so were his old parents.  He felt that he was admired and that his family and friends
were glad to see him; but they let him alone and he only stalked about in his glory, whistling
the American war-cry of "Yankee Doodle."

After due time, of course they all loosened up.  This night in his lodge in the Assiniboin
village he commenced to tell his stories.  But he could not tell one tenth--and yet, with the
very first, several of the old men and chiefs arose and went out.

They said that this Wijunjon was a liar, and that they would not listen to him.  The white
people were known to be great liars, and he had learned from them!

In vain, the next day, and the next day, the Pigeon's-egg Head tried to make himself popular.

First, he let his wife cut off the tails of his frock coat, to fashion herself a pair of nice
blue leggins.  His silver-lace hat-band she took for garters.  The rest of his coat he gave
to his brother; and now he wore his white shirt with the tails outside.

He gave away his boots--which hurt his feet.  He gave away the tails of his shirt, also his
brass studs and sleeve-buttons.  And with his keg of rum, and his broad-sword dragging and
tripping him, he paid visits from lodge to lodge, and whistled "Yankee Doodle."

Pretty soon he had nothing left but his blue umbrella.  That was the only thing he kept.  Even
his hat was gone; his sword was used by his wife, as a meat chopper.  And still he was not popular.

Each night men and women gathered from near and far, to hear him talk, in his lodge.  They
sat silent and critical, while he told them the honest truth.

He worked very hard.  He labored to describe the long journey, and the marvelous number of
white man's lodges, and villages, and the stage coaches, and the railroads; the forts, and
the ships-of-many-big-guns, and the tremendous "council-house" at Washington; and the patent
office (great-medicine-place, filled with curious machines); and the war parade of American
soldiers, and the balloon--a huge ball which carried a man to the Great Spirit in the sky;
and the beautiful white squaws with red cheeks.

The people listened; and when they went out they said among themselves: "Those things are not
true.  The Pigeon's-egg Head is the greatest liar in the world.  The other nations will laugh
at the Assiniboins."

Wijunjon did not despair.  He was so full of words that he simply must talk, or burst.  He
wished that he might bring forward the other Assiniboin who had been with him and who knew
that all these stories were true; but the other Assiniboin had died on the way home.  That
was too bad.

However, he stuck to his stories, for he knew that he was right.  His people had sent him to
see, and he had seen, and he spoke only true words.

After a while, the Assiniboins took a different view of Wijunjon.  Any person who had such
stories in his brain was certainly great medicine. No common liar could invent these stories
about impossible wonders.

Yes, Wijunjon was doubtless taught by a spirit.  He had dreamed.

Now the Assiniboin people looked upon Wijunjon with awe and fear.  A person equipped with such
power might be very dangerous.  They decided that he ought to be killed.

Meanwhile Wijunjon went right on telling his stories.  He still had hopes--and besides, it
was pleasant to be the center of a gaping circle, and to walk around with folks gazing so at him.

There was a young man who agreed to rid the Assiniboins of this wizard. Beyond question, Wijunjon
was too great medicine to be killed by an ordinary bullet; another way should be found.

This young man, also, was a dreamer.  And in his dreams he was told, he said, how to kill Wijunjon.
The wizard must be shot with an iron pot handle!  Nothing else would do the work.

Accordingly, the young man appointed to kill Wijunjon for being bad medicine, found an iron
pot handle, and spent a whole day filing it down to fit into the muzzle of his gun.  Then from
behind he shot the terrible Pigeon's-egg Head and scattered his lying brains about, and the
wizard fell dead.

CHAPTER XX

THE BLACKFEET DEFY THE CROWS (1834)

"COME AND TAKE US"

Southwest from the Mandans there lived the Crow nation.  They roved through the Yellowstone
River country of southern Montana to the Rocky Mountains; and southward through the mountains
into the Wind River and Big Horn country of western Wyoming.

West from the Mandans there lived the Blackfeet nation.  They roved through the Missouri country
of northern Montana, and north into Canada.

The land of the Crows and of the Blackfeet overlapped.  The two peoples were at war, on the
plains and in the mountains.

By reason of their wars, the Crow nation had shrunk until they were down to seven thousand
people, with many more women than men.  But their warriors were tall and stately, their women
industrious, their garb elegant.  Their buffalo-hide lodges and their buffalo-robe clothing
were the whitest, finest in the West.  They had countless horses.  And the long hair of their
men set them high in dignity.

Oiled every morning with bear's grease, the hair of a proud Crow warrior swept the ground behind
him.  The hair of Chief Long-hair measured ten feet, seven inches, and rolled into a bunch
it weighed several pounds.  When it had turned white, he worshipped it as his medicine.

The Crows' name for themselves was Ab-sa-ro-ke--Sparrow Hawk People. They were of the Siouan
family and cousins of the Minnetarees, the Bird-woman's captors.  They had no villages, except
where they camped. They were dark, as high and mighty in their bearing as the Mohawks or Senecas,
were wonderful riders and looked upon the white men not as worthy enemies but as persons who
should be plundered of horses and goods.

In the white men's camps they were polite--and took away with them whatever they could.  However,
many white traders spoke well of the Crows.

The name of the Blackfeet was Sik-sik-a, which means the same.  It referred to their black
moccasins.  They were Algonquins, and in power ranked with the Iroquois of the East.  The Blackfeet,
the Bloods and the Piegans formed the league of the Siksika nation.  They warred right and
left, with the Crees, the Assiniboins, the Sioux, the Crows, the Pierced Noses, and with practically
all tribes; they were hostile to the white Americans who hunted in their country; but their
wars had not cut them down, for they numbered close to forty thousand people.

Like the Crows their enemy-neighbors they were rovers, never staying long in one spot.  They
were unlike the Crows in appearance, being shorter, broad-shouldered and deep-chested.  No
warriors were more feared.

In November of 1834, amidst the Wind River Mountains of western Wyoming five hundred Crows
were ahorse, at early morning, to chase the buffalo. And a gallant sight they made as they
rode gaily out; in their white robes, their long plaited hair flying, their best horses prancing
under them and decorated with red streamers.

Chief Grizzly Bear led.  Chief Long-hair, now almost eighty years of age, was with another band.

In this Chief Grizzly Bear band there rode a party of white beaver-hunters who were to spend
the winter with the Crows.  They now were to be shown how the Crows killed buffalo.

Pretty soon, while the Crows cantered on, they sighted a group of moving figures at the base
of the hills two or three miles distant across the valley.  Everybody stopped short to peer.
Buffalo?  No! Indians, on foot and in a hurry--Blackfeet!

How, from so far away, the Crows could tell that these were Blackfeet, the white men did not
know.  But with a yell of joy and rage, every Crow lashed his horse and forward they all dashed,
racing to catch the hated Blackfeet.

The white hunters followed hard.  It was to be an Indian battle, instead of an Indian buffalo-chase.

The Blackfeet numbered less than one hundred.  They were a war party. Were they hunting buffalo,
they would have been on horseback; but even among the horse Indians the war parties were likely
to travel on foot, so as to be able to hide more easily.  They counted upon stealing horses,
for the homeward trail.

These Blackfeet had been very rash, but that was Blackfoot nature. They had sighted the Crows
as soon as the Crows had sighted them, and were hustling at best speed to get back into the hills.

The Crows, whooping gladly and expecting to make short work of their enemies, first made short
work of the distance.  Their robes were dropped, their guns loaded, their bows were strung,
they spread out wider--the Blackfeet were cut off and desperately scrambling up a rocky slope--could
never make it--never, never--they had halted--what were they doing?

Aha!  From the hill slope there arose answering whoops; a few guns cracked; and at the base
and half-way up, the Crows stopped and gazed and yelled.

The plucky Blackfeet had "forted."  They were in a natural fort of rock wall.  On either side
of them a rock out-crop in a ridge four feet high extended up hill, to meet, near the top,
a cross-ridge ten feet high.

While half the warriors defended with guns and bows, the other half were busily piling up brush
and boulders, to close the down-hill opening.

Now whoop answered whoop and threat answered threat, while the Crows rode around and around,
at safe distance, seeking a weak place.  Chief Grizzly Bear held council with the sub-chiefs.
Away sped an express, to get reinforcements from the camp.

At the first charge upon the fort, three Crows had been killed, and only one Blackfoot.  That
would never do: three scalps in trade for one was a poor count, to the Crows.

They were five hundred, the Blackfeet were only ninety; but the Crows held off, waiting their
reinforcements, while from their fort the Blackfeet yelled taunt after taunt.

"Bring up your squaws'!  Let them lead you.  But our scalps will never dry in a Crow lodge!"

Here, at last, came the people from the camp: the old men, women, boys--everybody who could
mount a horse and who could find a weapon; all shrieking madly until the whole valley rang
with savage cries.

Matters looked bad for the Blackfeet.  At least two thousand Crows were surrounding them, hooting
at them, shaking guns and bows and spears at them.  And the Blackfeet, secure in their fort,
jeered back.  They were brave warriors.

Chief Grizzly Bear called another council.  In spite of all the gesturing and whooping and
firing of guns, the Blackfeet were unharmed. The Crows had little heart for charging in, upon
the muzzles of those deadly pieces with the fierce Blackfeet behind.

The white beaver-hunters, not wishing to anger the Blackfeet, and curious to see what was about
to happen, withdrew to a clump of cedar trees, about two hundred yards from the fort.  The
white men had decided to be spectators, in a grand-stand.

Presently Chief Grizzly Bear and his chiefs seemed to have agreed upon a plan of battle.  Had
they been white men, themselves, they would have stormed the fort at once, and carried the
fight to close quarters; but that was not Indian way.

To lose a warrior was a serious matter.  Warriors were not made in a day.  And without warriors,
a tribe would soon perish.  "He who fights and runs away, may live to fight another day," was
the Indians' motto. They preferred to play safe.

Now the Crows formed in line, two or three hundred abreast, and charged as if they were intending
to run right over the fort.  It was a great sight.  But it did not frighten the Blackfeet.

Up the hill slope galloped the Crow warriors and boys, shooting and yelling.  The stout Blackfeet,
crouched behind their barricade, volleyed back; and long before the Crows drove their charge
home, it broke.

Soon several more Crow warriors were lying on the field.  The wails of the squaws sounded loudly.
No Blackfeet had been hurt.

The Crows changed their tactics.  They avoided the fort, until they had gained the top of the
hill.  Then in a long single file, they tore past that end of the fort, letting fly with bullet
and arrow as they sped by.

Each warrior threw himself to the opposite side of his horse, and hanging there with only one
arm and one leg exposed to the fort, shot under his horse's neck.

It was an endless chain of riders, shuttling past the fort, and shooting--but that did not work.

The Blackfeet arrows and bullets caught the horses, and once in a while a rider; and soon there
were ten Crows down.

The Crows quit, to rest their horses, and to talk.  Their women were wailing still more loudly.
War was hard on the women, too.  For every relative killed, they had to cut off a finger joint,
besides gashing their faces and hands with knives.

In their little fort, the Blackfeet were as boldly defiant as ever.

"Come and take us!" they gibed.  "Where are the Crow men?  We thought we saw Crow men among
you.  Come and take us, but you will never take us alive!"

"What will be done now?" the white men queried of a black man who had joined them, in the clump
of cedars.

He was not all black.  He was half white, one quarter negro and one quarter Cherokee.  He had
lived over twenty years in the Indian country of the upper Missouri River; mainly with the
Crows.  Edward Rose had been his name, when young; but now he was a wrinkled, stout old man,
called Cut-nose, and looked like a crinkly-headed Indian.

"The Crows are losing too many warriors.  They have no stomach for that kind of work," answered
the old squaw-man.

The Crow chiefs and braves were seated in a circle, near the cedars, and listening to the speakers
who stood up, one after another.

"Our marrow-bones are broken," some asserted.  "The enemy is in a fort; we are outside.  We
will lose more men than he.  Let us draw off; and when he is in the open, we can then attack
as we please."

"He is few; we are many.  Our slain warriors and their women cry for vengeance," asserted others.
"We will be called cowards if we retreat. If we charge all together we may lose a few braves,
but there will be no Blackfeet left to laugh at us."

These seemed to be the voices that carried.  The pipe was passed around the circle, every man
puffed at it, and the council broke up in a tremendous yelling.

Now the end of the Blackfeet loomed large.  Ahorse and afoot the Crows massed, to charge from
below and on either flank.  Their chiefs hastened hither and thither, urging them.  The women
and children shrieked encouragement.

In their little fort the Blackfeet also listened to their chiefs.  They showed not the slightest
sign of fear.  Their fierce faces glared over the ramparts.  Their weapons were held firmly.

The Crows had aroused themselves to such a pitch that they acted half insane.  Forward they
charged in howling masses--but the bullets and arrows pelted them thickly, more warriors fell--they
scattered and ran away.  The Blackfeet hooted them.

This made old Cut-nose mad.  He hastened out to where the Crows were collected in doubt what
next to do, and climbed upon a rock, that they all might see him.

"Listen!" he shouted.  "You act as if you expected to kill the enemy with your noise.  Your
voices are big and your hearts are small.  These white men see that the Crows cannot protect
their hunting grounds; they will not trade with a nation of cowards and women; they will trade
with the Blackfeet, who own the country.  The Blackfeet will go home and tell the people that
three thousand Crows could not take ninety warriors.  After this no nation will have anything
to do with the Crows.  I am ashamed to be found among the Crows.  I told the white men that
you could fight.  Now I will show you how black men and white men can fight."

And he leaped from his rock, and without glancing behind him he ran for the fort.  The Crows
did not delay an instant.  Pellmell they rushed after him, caught up with him, swarmed against
the brush and rock walls--the Blackfeet met them stanchly, and gave way not an inch--and the
fighting was terrible.

But over the barricade poured the Crows.  In a moment the whole interior was a dense mass of
Indians, engaged hand to hand, and every one yelling until, as said the white men, "The noise
fairly lifted the caps from our heads."

Guns and hatchets and clubs and knives rose and fell.  The Crow women were pressing to the
outskirts, to kill the wounded enemy.  Gradually the weight of the Crows forced the Blackfeet
back.  The Blackfeet began to emerge over the upper end of the fort--their faces still to the foe.

Presently all who might escape, were outside--but their enemies surrounded them at once.  The
Blackfeet remaining were not many.  They never faltered nor signed surrender.  They only sang
their death chants; and forming in close order they moved along the ridge like one man, cutting
a way with their knives.

By the half dozen they dropped; even those who dropped, fought until they were dead.  Soon
the platoon was merely a squad; the squad melted to a spot; there was a swirl, covering the
spot; and the spot had been washed out.

Not a Blackfoot was left, able to stand.  The wounded who had lost their weapons hurled taunts,
as they lay helpless, until the Crows finished them also.  Truly had the Blackfeet yelled:
"Come and take us! But you will never take us alive!"

This night there was much mourning in the Crow camp.  Thirty chiefs and braves had been killed,
twice that number wounded, and many horses disabled.  No prisoner had been brought in, to pay
by torture.  The Blackfeet nation would look upon the fight as their victory.

So the Crow dead were buried; and into each grave of chief or brave were placed his weapons
and the shaved off mane and tail of his best horse--for every hair would become a horse for
him, in the spirit world.  In their war days they ranged from the Platte River of western Nebraska
down into New Mexico and Texas.  But their favorite hunting grounds lay south of the Arkansas
River of western Kansas and southeastern Colorado.

It was a desert country, of whity-yellow sand and sharp bare hills, with the Rocky Mountains
distant in the west, and the only green that of the trees and brush along the water-courses.
Nevertheless it was a very good kind of country.

It had plenty of buffalo.  The timber and the streams supplied winter shelter.  The wagon-road
of the white merchants, between the Missouri River and Santa Fe of New Mexico, ran through
the middle of it and furnished much plunder.  In the south, where lay Comanche land and Apache
land, there were Mexican settlements that furnished horses.

With the Comanches and Apaches, and with the Cheyennes and Arapahos north, the Kiowas were
friends.  To the Pawnees they were enemies, and their name carried dread through many years
of fighting.

Now in the summer of 1839, twenty Kiowa warriors left their village near the Arkansas River
in present southern Kansas, to go down across Comanche country and get horses and mules from
the Pasunke, or the Mexicans of El Paso, which is on the Rio Grande River border between northwestern
Texas and Mexico.  However, in those days all that region was Mexico.

The head chief of the party was old Do-has-an, or Bluff.  But he did not command.  Gua-da-lon-te,
or Painted-red, was the war chief. Dohasan would take command only in case Gua-da-lon-te was
killed. Among the warriors there were Dagoi, and Kon-a-te, whose name means "Black-tripe."

After several days' travel horseback clear across New Mexico they came to El Paso town, where
many goods were stored on the way between New Mexico and Old Mexico, and where the people got
rich by trading and by making wine from grapes.  But they could see soldiers guarding El Paso;
so they did not dare to charge in and gather horses and mules from the frightened Pasunke.

Dohasan, who was wise as well as brave, advised against it.

"Another time," he said.  "We are too few, and we are a long way from home.  Let us go, and
come again.  Maybe on the way tip we will meet with luck among the other villages."

They rested only the one night, and turned back, thinking that they had not been discovered.
At the end of a day's journey through a bad, waterless land, they halted and camped by a spring,
of which they knew.

It was a big rock-sink or round, deep basin, with, a pool of water at the bottom, and a cave
that extended under a shelf.

The Mexican soldiers must have struck their trail, or perhaps had followed them from El Paso;
for early in the morning there was a sudden shooting from all around, and much yelling.  Bullets
whined and spatted, and horses screamed and fell over.

"Into the cave!" shouted Painted-red.  "Quick!"

Hustled by old Bluff and Painted-red, into the cave they bolted. Nobody had been hurt, and
the soldiers were afraid to venture in after them, but right speedily they found themselves
badly off.

The soldiers camped along the edge of the well, above, so as to kill them by thirst and hunger.
Only in the darkness might the Kiowas, two or three at a time, crawl out of the cave, gulp
a few swallows from the pool, maybe slash a strip of horse-meat, and scuttle in again.

While doing this, Dagoi was shot in the leg, so that he could not walk. In a couple of days
the dead horses began to decay, for the sun was very hot.  The smell grew sickening.  The flesh
was sickening.  One or two of the dead horses lay in the pool, and the water got sickening.
The Mexican soldiers stayed close and watchful, and yelled insults in Spanish.

But they had with them several Apache scouts; and one of the Apaches called in Comanche, so
that the soldiers would not understand.

"Be of good cheer, brothers," he called.  "Be strong and hold out, until these dogs of Mexicans
tire."

The Kiowas had no thought of surrendering.  They would rather die where they were, because
if they surrendered, they would be killed anyway. Old Dohasan and others among them belonged
to the society of Ka-itse-nko or Real Dogs--whose members were under a vow never to surrender.

Part of them guarded the cave's mouth, and the rest explored back inside.  At the very end
there was a hole which let in daylight. Konate was boosted up; but when he stuck his head through,
a soldier saw it and he had to duck down.  Thereupon the soldiers stopped the hole with a large
rock.

When ten days and nine nights had passed, they all decided that they would either escape or
be killed.  The horse meat could not be touched; neither could the water.  It was better to
die in the open, like men, than to die in a hole, like gophers.

The soldiers guarded the only trail that led up the side of the cliff wall, out of the well;
but at another side there was a cedar which had rooted in a crack and almost reached the rim.
By hard climbing a man might manage to scramble up and gain the open.

But what to do with Dagoi, who had only one leg and was weak from pain?

"You will not leave me, my brothers?" implored Dagoi.  "It is true I am wounded, but if you
leave me, I shall surely die.  Perhaps you can carry me on your backs.  Or wait a day or two,
and the soldiers will grow tired."

"No," said old Dohasan.  "That is impossible.  We must move fast, and to get you up the tree
would make noise.  If we wait, or if we stay, we will all die, and it is better that one should
die than that all should die.  Have a strong heart, my son.  You are a warrior, and you must
die like a warrior."

Dagoi bowed his head.

"Those are good words," he answered.  "I hear them and they make me strong.  I am a man, and
I am not afraid.  When you get home, tell my friends to come and avenge me."

In the darkness Dagoi dragged himself to the pool, and sat beside it, waiting for daylight
and the bullets of the soldiers.

Old Dohasan sang the death-chant of the Real Dogs.  Then he stepped silently out, leading the
file of warriors to the wall under the tree, that he might be the first to climb and meet the
soldiers in case they were on watch.

Up he went, into the cedar, and on; up went all, one after another, as fast as they could.
The camp-fires of the Mexican soldiers were glowing, right and left and behind and before,
along the rim; but without a sound the nineteen gaunt Kiowas, bending low, stole swiftly forward,
at the heels of Dohasan.

They succeeded.  But in finding horses, somebody made a little noise, and the Mexicans fired
wildly into the darkness.  However, answering not, and leading the horses out a short way,
step by step, they were ready to vault on.

"Anybody hurt?"

"A bullet has gone through my body," said Konate.  "But I will try to ride."

"We must hurry," spoke Painted-red.  The camp was all aroused. "Someone help Konate."

Away they dashed, several riding double, and Konate supported in his seat by a comrade.  Behind,
in the well, Dagoi sat beside the pool and kept his heart strong for the end that would come
by daylight.

All that night and all the next day they rode, making northeast toward the desolate desert
region of the Staked Plain, on the homeward way across western Texas.  No Mexican soldiers
would follow into the Staked Plain.

When after hard riding they arrived at Sun-mountain Spring, on the top of a high, bare-rock
hill near the Staked Plain, Konate's wound had spoiled in him and he could not sit upright
on his horse.  He was very ill.

"I am about to die, friends," he gasped.  "Do not try to carry me farther.  But go, yourselves;
and some day come back for my bones."

He spoke sense.  Any one might see that he had only a few hours to live, and that soon his
comrades would be carrying only a body across the Staked Plain, where the sun beat hotly and
water was far apart.

It was better that they leave him here, at the spring where they might find his bones.  So
on the water's edge they built a shade for Konate, with a few crooked cedar branches, and bidding
him goodby they rode on, into the great Staked Plain.

They expected that they would never seen him again.

What happened now to Konate, he often told, and he told it always the same; therefore it must
be true.  For the rest of the long day he lay there, with the sun beating down around him,
and his mind and body very sick from his wound.  He was unable to sleep.  The sun set, and
the air changed to cool, the twilight deepened to dusk; alone on his hilltop he closed his
eyes, and waited for the spirit of the tai-me, or Sun-dance medicine, to bear him to his fathers.

In the star-light he heard a wolf howl, far off.  He listened, and the howl sounded again,
nearer, from another direction.  Then he knew that the wolf had scented him and was ranging
to find his spot.  That would be bad--to be eaten by a wolf and have one's bones scattered!

Konate groaned.  His heart had been strong, until this moment.  He had hoped that his bones
would be cared for.

Soon he heard the wolf, at hand; there was the soft patter of its pads, and the sniffing of
its inquiring nose, seeking him out.  And now he saw the wolf, with shining eyes peering into
the bough shelter where he lay helpless, unable even to speak.

That was an agonizing moment, for Konate.  But lo, instead of jumping upon him, the wolf trotted
forward, and gently licked his wounds, and then lay quietly down beside him.

Konate was amazed and thankful.  While the wolf lay there, next he heard another sound, in
the distance: the shrill eagle-bone-whistle music of the great Sun-dance of the Kiowa nation.
The music drew nearer, and he heard the Sun-dance song; and while he listened, strong of heart
again, he saw the medicine spirit of the Sun-dance standing before him, at the entrance to
the shelter.

"I pity you and shall not let you die," said the medicine spirit.  "You shall see your home
and friends."

Then the medicine spirit brought down a rain, to wash Konate's wounds and cool his fever. 
The medicine spirit sat with Konate most of the night, and told him many things: told him how
to make a new kind of Sun-dance shield, and also an a-po-te, or sacred forked staff, that should
be a medicine staff and have magic powers.

Toward morning the medicine spirit left, saying:

"Help is near."

Every bit of this Konate firmly insisted was true, although white men claimed that he dreamed.
For, listen:

Meanwhile the Painted-red party were riding on, and in the Staked Plain they met six Comanches,
bound to Mexico after plunder.  They spoke to the Comanches regarding Konate, and asked them
to cover his body so that the wolves should not get it.

This the Comanches promised to do, and continued to the Sun-mountain Spring where Konate had
been left to die.

But when they reached the spring, they found Konate alive and stronger than when his comrades
had bid him goodby!  That astonished them.  They then knew that he was "medicine."  Therefore
they washed him, and gave him food, and putting him on an extra horse they turned back and
took him home.

The village, and all the tribe, also, were astonished to see him again. As proof that he had
been visited by the medicine spirit, he made the medicine shield, of a new design, and the
apote, or sacred forked stick.  He took the name Pa-ta-dal, or Lean Bull.  After that the keepers
of the medicine stick bore the same name.

Konate carried the medicine stick in the Sun-dance, for several years, and then handed it on
to his nephew K'a-ya-nti, or Falls-over-a-bank, who became Lean Bull the second--but the white
people called him Poor Buffalo.

This apote was a two-pronged stick about four feet long, decorated with wild sage.  It was
smooth and had no bark, and was brought out only once a year, for the Sun-dance.  The keeper
of it used it for beating time, in the dance.  At the close of the dance it was stuck, forks
up, in the ground in the center of the medicine lodge, and left until the next year.

When the stick was eighteen years old Konate's nephew planted it as before, at the close of
the Sun-dance, in the center of the medicine lodge on the plain; and when the Kiowas returned,
the next summer, for another Sun-dance, they discovered that the apote had been planted the
other end up, and was putting forth green leaves!

For a stick eighteen years old, without bark, to do this, was certainly great medicine.  No
one now might doubt the story of Konate, to whom the taime spirit had talked, under the bough
shelter by the Sun-mountain Spring.

None of the Kiowas dared to touch the apote, this time--or to stay near the medicine lodge.
The dance was held at another place.

When, ten years later, or in October, 1867, the Kiowas met in a treaty council with the United
States, near the present town of Medicine Lodge on Medicine Lodge Creek, southern Kansas, they
were enabled to show that the apote had grown to be a large tree.

Such had been the strong medicine of Konate, to whom, about to die from his wounds, in his
shelter by the Sun-mountain Spring beyond the Staked Plain, the taime spirit had talked.

Konate was dead; but K'a-ya-nti, his nephew, the other keeper of the stick, was still alive;
and he knew.  The Indians who bore this name were the powerful Dakotas--the true Sioux of history.

The wide Nation of the Lakota, as these Sioux called themselves, was a league of seven council
fires.

The four divisions of the Santees lived in Minnesota; the two divisions of the Yanktons lived
between them and the Missouri River; the one large division of the Tetons lived in their Dakota
country, west of the Missouri River.

The Santees, the Yanktons and the Tetons spoke their own dialects. They differed in appearance
from one another.  They were separated into tribes and bands.

Even as late as 1904 they numbered twenty-five thousand people in the United States.  By mind,
muscle and morals they have been rated as leaders of the Western red men.  They roamed hither-thither,
and depended upon the buffalo for food.  They waged stout war.

The Tetons were the strongest, and formed half of, the Dakota nation. It was chiefly they who
fought the United States soldiers for so long. The war opened in 1855, over the killing of
a crippled cow by a Min-i-con-jou, at Fort Laramie of Wyoming, on the Oregon Trail of the emigrants.

The Brulés, or Burnt Thighs; the Og-la-las, or Scatter-one's-own; the Hunk-pa-pas, or Those-who-camp-by-themselves;
the Min-i-con-jous, or Those-who-plant-beside-the-stream; the Si-ha-sa-pas, or Black-moccasins:
these were the Teton Sioux who battled the hardest to save their buffalo and their lands from
the white man.

Red Cloud at first was chief of the Bad Faces band of Oglala Sioux. They were a small fighting
band, but he was a noted brave.  His count showed more coups, or strike-the-enemy feats, than
the count of any other warrior of the Oglalas.  Before he retired from war, his coups numbered
eighty.

He was born in 1822.  His Sioux name was Makh-pia-sha, meaning Red Cloud.  In the beginning
it probably referred to a cloud at sunrise or sunset; later it referred to his army of warriors
whose red blankets covered the hills.

When he was forty years old, there was much excitement among the white men to the west of the
Sioux range.  From the mines of Idaho the gold-seekers had crossed to the eastern base of the
Rocky Mountains in western Montana.  Mining camps such as Helena, Bozeman and Virginia City
sprang up.

The Oregon Trail of the emigrants already passed through the Sioux country, and the Sioux had
agreed to let it alone.  Now the United States asked permission to make a new road, which from
Fort Laramie of southern Wyoming would leave the Oregon Trail, and branch off northwest, through
the Powder River and the Big Horn country of Wyoming, and on west across Montana, as a short-cut
to the gold-fields.

This part of Wyoming really was Crow Indian country; but the Sioux had driven the Crows out,
and with the Northern Cheyennes were using the region for a hunting ground.  The white man's
trails to the south had frightened the buffalo and reduced the herds; the Powder River valleys
were the only ranges left to the Sioux, where they might hunt and always find plenty of meat.

Some of the Sioux chiefs did sign a treaty for the new road.  The only Oglalas who signed were
subchiefs.  Red Cloud did not sign.  The United States went ahead, anyway.  Troops were sent
forward, to begin the work of building the road.  Red Cloud, with his Oglalas and some Cheyennes,
surrounded them and captured them; held them prisoners for two weeks, until his young men threatened
to kill them.  Then he released them, with a warning.

"I shall stand in the trail," he said.  Those were the words of Pontiac, to Major Rogers, one
hundred years before.

United States officials were ordered to Fort Laramie, to talk with the angry Red Cloud.  He
declined to meet them.

But already a number of white gold-seekers had entered by this Bozeman Trail, as it was known.
In June, of the next year, 1866, the United States tried again to get Red Cloud's name on the
paper.  A council was called at Fort Laramie.

During the last year, another fort had been located.  It was Fort Reno--the first out-post
of the new trail, at the Powder River, one hundred and sixty-seven miles along from Laramie.

Red Cloud, and his lieutenant, They-fear-even-his-horses, came in to talk with the United States,
at Fort Laramie.  A great throng of Indians was present, for Fort Laramie was a busy post.

Nothing could be done with the Red Cloud band.  The United States was willing to promise that
nobody should be allowed to leave the new road, or to disturb any game.  Red Cloud only shook
his head.  He well knew that the white travelers would not obey the law.  They would hunt and
camp, as they chose.

"Wah-nee-chee!" he said.  "No good!  Why do you come here and ask for what you have already
taken?  A fort has been built, and the road is being used.  I say again, we will not sell our
hunting grounds for a road."

But the United States had decided.  The Government had been assured by the treaty makers that
all the Sioux would finally yield.  There was last fall's treaty, as a starter.  The Sioux
from every band had signed.  Besides, the Government could not give up the right to open roads.
A railroad had the power to take right-of-way through towns and lands; and a Government wagon
road should have the same license.

So certain was the Government that the road would be opened, that even while the council with
the Red Cloud Oglalas was in session, there arrived at Fort Laramie Colonel Henry B. Carrington
of the Eighteenth Infantry, with seven hundred soldiers.

Red Cloud saw the camp.

"Where are those soldiers going?"

"They are sent to open the new road and build forts."

"The Americans seek to steal our land whether we say yes or no!" angrily uttered Red Cloud.
"They will have to fight."

He and They-fear-even-his-horses (whom the white men called "Young-man-afraid-of-his-horses")
seized their rifles, and rode away, and three hundred of their warriors followed them.

"Red Cloud means war," warned the Indians who remained.  "The Great Father makes us presents,
to buy the road; but the white soldiers come to steal it first.  In two moons the white war
chief will not have a hoof left."

An express sent after Red Cloud, to ask him to return, was whipped with bows and ordered to
get out and tell the white chiefs that Red Cloud would not talk about the road.

Colonel Carrington marched on, into the forbidden land.  The officers' wives were with them.
Traders along the line insisted that the Indians were determined to fight; but some of the
emigrant outfits bound over the trail to the mines were scornful of danger.  One emigrant captain
laughed, when the women were timid.

"You'll never see an Injun unless he comes in to beg for sugar and tobacco," he said.  "I've
been on the plains too long to be scared by such trash."

This was at Fort Reno.  That very morning, in broad daylight Red Cloud's band ran off all the
post sutler's horses and mules while the soldiers looked on.  Eighty men pursued, and captured
only one Indian pony loaded with goods obtained at Fort Laramie.

Colonel Carrington left a detachment here at the Powder River, to build a better Fort Reno.
He marched on.

Meanwhile Red Cloud had been growing stronger.  Sioux warriors were hastening to join him.
Spotted Tail of the Brulés had declined to accept the treaty for opening the road--he waited
for Red Cloud; but he was wisely staying at home.  However, his Brulé young men were riding
away in large numbers, and he told the white people at Fort Laramie that if they "went far
on the trail they had better go prepared to look out for their hair."

Red Cloud was watching the march of the soldiers.  He did not attack; but when he saw them
pushing on, and finally making camp to locate another fort, fifty miles northwest of Reno,
on Piney Fork of Lodge-pole Creek, in the Big Horn Mountains of northern Wyoming, he again
sent a message, by a party of soldiers whom he met and turned back.

"The white chief must take his soldiers out of this country.  Let him decide for peace or war.
If he wants peace, he can go back to Powder River.  The fort there can stay.  But no forts
shall be built farther on the road, and no soldiers shall march over the road which has never
been given to the white people."

Red Cloud wanted an answer at once.  He also asked that the white chief come to him with an
interpreter, and settle matters in a council.  But the messenger was held at the fort for a
short time, and Red Cloud moved his warriors to a new place.

Colonel Carrington invited the Sioux to come to the camp; and went ahead building his fort.
Some bands of Northern Cheyennes appeared for a talk.  They said that Red Cloud had urged them
to join the Sioux in keeping the white men out of the hunting grounds, and that he knew what
the soldiers had been doing every hour since they left Fort Laramie.

The Cheyennes seemed a little fearful of the Sioux; but said that if they were given provisions,
they would stay away from the white trail.

When the Cheyennes returned to the Sioux, Red Cloud asked them what the white chief had said.

"Is he going back to the Powder River?"

"No," answered Black Horse, of the Cheyennes.  "The white chief will not go back, and his soldiers
will go on."

"What presents did he give you?"

"All we wanted to eat.  He wishes the Sioux and the Cheyennes and all the other Indians to
go to Fort Laramie, and sign the treaty, and get more presents.  I think that we had better
take the white man's hand and presents, rather than fight him and lose everything."

"No!" replied Red Cloud.  "The white man lies and steals.  My lodges were many; now they are
few.  The white man wants all.  He must fight, and the Indian will die where his fathers died."

With that, the Sioux unstrung their bows and whipped the Cheyennes on the face and back, crying,
"Coup!" as if they were striking the enemy.

So Black Horse sent word that the Sioux intended war.

The fort was named Fort Phil Kearney.  It was built of timber cut in the pine woods seven miles
distant, and was surrounded by a palisade or high fence of thick pickets set upright.

Saw mills were placed in the woods, and the wood-camps were protected by block-houses.  Almost
one hundred wagons were used, to haul the logs and boards.

One hundred miles onward, another fort was started: Fort C. F. Smith.

The Crows informed Colonel Carrington that Red Cloud had tried to enlist even them--that all
the Sioux were uniting to drive out the white men from this region, and that in the fall there
would be a "big fight" at the two forts.

White Mouth and Rotten Tail said that they were half a day in riding through the Sioux village;
there were fifteen hundred lodges.  In truth, Chief Red Cloud had over two thousand warriors,
with whom to stand in the path.

And there he stood.  Nobody might doubt that.  His raiders watched every mile of the trail
back to Powder River, and not an emigrant train got through.  He himself, with two thousand
warriors, guarded Fort Kearney, where the white chief lived.

Nobody might venture from it to hunt game.  The wood wagons might move only when many together
and well armed.  Not a load of hay could be brought in without strong escort.  After a time
no mail could be sent on to Fort Smith.

Colonel Carrington had five companies of infantry and one company of the Second Cavalry.  The
infantry was mostly recruits.  Their guns were old style muzzle loaders; but the band had the
new Spencer breech-loaders.

He asked for better guns and more ammunition.  The Government was not certain that the Sioux
could do much against soldiers of a country which had just been trained by a four years' war,
and Carrington was left to prove it.

Chief Red Cloud had his first chance to prove the opposite on December 6.  He had been amusing
his warriors by letting them gallop past the fort and shout challenges to the soldiers to come
out and fight; then when the cannon shot at them, they dodged the shells--but did not always
succeed.

The big guns that shot twice surprised them.

On the morning of December 6 Red Cloud struck in earnest, and had planned to strike hard. 
He had a line of signal flags seven miles long, by which to direct his army.  Then he sent
a company to attack a wood train.

The attack on the wood train brought the troops out of the fort.  One detachment of thirty-five
cavalry and a few mounted infantry was commanded by Captain William J. Fetterman.  He was very
anxious to fight Indians; in fact, the officers all had set their hearts upon "taking Red Cloud's
scalp."

Captain Fetterman rescued the wagon train, by chasing the Sioux away; but in about five miles
Red Cloud faced his men about and closed.  It was an ambuscade.  The troopers of the cavalry
were stampeded, and the captain found himself, with two other officers and a dozen men, surrounded
by yelling warriors.

Colonel Carrington arrived just in time to save him; but young Lieutenant H. S. Bingham of
the Second Cavalry was killed, and so was Sergeant Bowers.

When Captain Fetterman had returned to the fort he had changed his mind regarding the prowess
of the Sioux, whom he had thought to be only robbers.

"I have learned a lesson," he remarked.  "This Indian war has become a hand-to-hand fight,
and requires great caution.  I'll take no more risks like that of today!"

Red Cloud was not satisfied.  His warriors had not done exactly as he had told them to do.
He bided his time.

On the morning of December 21 he was again ready.  His men were stationed, waiting for a wood
train to appear.  It appeared, starting out to chop timber in the pine woods, and haul the
logs to the fort.

It was an unusually strong train--a number of heavy wagons, and ninety armed men.

Red Cloud let it get about four miles along, and ordered it attacked. He had spies upon a ridge
of hills, to watch the fort.

When the attack was heard at the fort, soldiers dashed out.  The Red Cloud warriors allowed
the wagon train to think that it had whipped them.  He withdrew, across the ridge.

The leader of the soldiers was Captain Fetterman, again.  He had asked for the command.  With
him was Captain Fred H. Brown, who expected to go back to Fort Laramie, and wished, first,
to get a scalp.  He and Captain Fetterman were rivals for scalps and had almost forgotten the
affair of December 6.  They were gallant soldiers, but reckless.

Altogether the detachment numbered seventy-nine officers and men, and two scouts named Wheatley
and Fisher.

Captain Fetterman was distinctly ordered by Colonel Carrington to do nothing but rescue the
wagon train.  He must not cross the ridge in pursuit of the Sioux.

Captain Fetterman did not move directly for the place of the wagon train.  He made a circuit,
to cut off the attacking Sioux, at their rear, or between the wagon train and the ridge to
the north of it.

He had taken no surgeon, so Dr. Hines was hurried after him.  The doctor came back in another
hurry.  He reported that the wagon train was on its way to the timber, without the captain;
and that the captain had disappeared, over the ridge!  Many Indians were in sight, and the
doctor had been obliged to stop short.

Now, on a sudden, there was a burst of distant gun-fire.  In twelve minutes a second detachment
of soldiers was on the run, from the fort for the battle; wagons and ambulances and more men
followed; and soon only one hundred and nineteen men remained.

The firing was very heavy, in volleys--then in fire-at-will; then it died down--quit.  Not
a sound could be heard, as the women and men in Fort Kearney strained their ears and eyes.

Presently a courier from the second detachment galloped headlong in. He said that the valley
beyond the ridge was swarming with Sioux; they yelled and dared the soldiers to come down to
the road there.  But of the Captain Fetterman command, no trace could be sighted.

The soldiers and the reinforcements stayed out all the afternoon.  They returned at dark; but
of the eighty-one others, none came back.  All of them, the entire eighty-one, had fallen to
the army of Red Cloud.

Nobody was alive to tell the story of the fight.  The signs on the field were plain, though;
and of course the Red Cloud warriors knew well what had occurred.

Captain Fetterman had crossed the ridge, to chase the Sioux.  Two thousand Red Cloud men were
waiting for him.  They permitted him to advance to the forbidden road.  The white soldiers
fought until their ammunition was almost spent.  Then the Red Cloud men rushed.  Only six of
the white soldiers were shot; the rest were killed by hand.

The plan of Red Cloud and his chiefs had been laid to get all the troops out of the fort, together;
kill them and seize the fort.

But the warriors had not waited long enough.  Their victory was too quick, and they lost too
many men, themselves, in the one fight: seventy, of killed and wounded, they said; sixty-five
of killed, alone, said the red blotches on the field.

Still, Red Cloud had closed the road with the bodies of the soldiers. He had made his word good.

The garrison in Fort Kearney gave up all thought of glory by capturing Red Cloud; and this
winter there was no more fighting.  How many warriors Red Cloud had, to "cover the hills with
their scarlet blankets," nobody knew; but the count ran from three thousand to five thousand.

The spring came, and the summer came, and the road had not been opened. In more than a year,
not a single wagon had passed upon it, through the hunting grounds of the Sioux.

Another white chief had been sent to take command of Fort Phil Kearney. He was Brigadier General
H. W. Wessels.  All this summer the soldiers were having to fight for wood and water.  The
contractor in charge of the teams hauling lumber complained that he must have more protection
or he would be unable to do the work.

Captain James Powell of the Twenty-seventh Infantry was ordered out to protect the lumber camps.
He took Lieutenant John C. Jenness and fifty-one men.

The wood choppers had two camps, about a mile apart.  The captain detailed twenty-five of his
men to guard the one camp, and escort the wagon trains to the fort; with the twenty-six others
he made a fort of wagon boxes, at the second camp.

He arranged fourteen of the wagon boxes on the ground, in a circle. Some of the boxes had been
lined with boiler iron. 'Twouldn't take him long to comb the kinks out of you."

"I don't think you have left any, Granny," said the Harvester. "I
see what you mean, and in all probability you are right, but I can't
send for the Girl."

"Name o' goodness why?"  He had plenty of ammunition
and plenty of new breech-loading rifles.

The little fort was located in an open basin, surrounded by gentle hills.  He directed the
men of the other camp to come in at the first sign of trouble.

The Sioux were at hand.  Red Cloud had been merely waiting for the soldiers to march out and
make it worth his while to descend.  He was resolved to destroy Fort Kearney this year, before
the snows.

It seemed to him that again he had the soldiers where he wanted them. Word of the flimsy little
corral spread a laugh among his two thousand warriors.  The squaws and old men were summoned
from the allied Sioux and out-law Cheyenne village, to come and see and be ready with their knives.

On the morning of August 2 he so suddenly attacked the unfortified wood camp that he cut it
off completely.  Two hundred of his men captured the mule herd; five hundred of them attacked
the wagon train there, burned the wagons and drove the soldiers and teamsters and choppers
who were outside the corral, in flight to Fort Kearney.  Scalps were taken.

Now it was the turn of the puny corral, and the rest of the soldiers.

He could see only the low circle of wagon-boxes.  They were covered with blankets; underneath
the blankets there were soldiers--few and frightened.

