ON BEING A DOCTRINAIRE                           43

III. CHRISTMAS AND THE LITERATURE OF DISILLUSION      97

 IV. THE IGNOMINY OF BEING GROWN-UP                  131

  V. CHRISTMAS AND THE SPIRIT OF DEMOCRACY           191

     "Christmas and the Spirit of Democracy" appeared originally in
     Everybody's Magazine, the four other essays in the Atlantic
     Monthly. Acknowledgments are due to the editors of these
     periodicals for permission to reprint them here.

I

The Bayonet-Poker

As I sit by my Christmas fire I now and then give it a poke with a bayonet. It is an old-fashioned
British bayonet which has seen worse days. I picked it up in a little shop in Birmingham for
two shillings. I was attracted to it as I am to all reformed characters. The hardened old sinner,
having had enough of war, was a candidate for a peaceful position. I was glad to have a hand
in his reformation.

To transform a sword into a pruning hook is a matter for a skilled smith, but to change a bayonet
into a poker is within the capacity of the least mechanical. All that is needed is to cause
the bayonet to forsake the murderous rifle barrel and cleave to a short wooden handle. Henceforth
its function is not to thrust itself into the vitals of men, but to encourage combustion on
winter nights.

The bayonet-poker fits into the philosophy of Christmas, at least into the way I find it easy
to philosophize. It seems a better symbol of what is happening than the harps of gold and the
other beautiful things of which the hymn-writers sing, but which ordinary people have never
seen. The golden harps were made for no other purpose than to produce celestial harmony. They
suggest a scene in which peace and good-will come magically and reign undisturbed. Everything
is exquisitely fitted for high uses. It is not so with the bayonet that was, and the poker
that is. For it peace and good-will are afterthoughts. They are not even remotely suggested
in its original constitution. And yet, for all that, it serves excellently as an instrument
of domestic felicity.

The difficulty with the Christmas message is not in getting itself proclaimed, but in getting
itself believed; that is, in any practicable fashion. Every one recognizes the eminent desirability
of establishing more amicable relations between the members of the human family. But is this
amiable desire likely to be fulfilled in this inherently bellicose world?

The argument against Christmas has taken a menacingly scientific form. A deluge of cold water
in the form of unwelcome facts has been thrown upon our enthusiasm for humanity.

"Peace on earth," it is said, "is against Nature. It flies in the face of the processes of
evolution. You have only to look about you to see that everything has been made for a quite
different purpose. For ages Mother Nature has been keeping house in her own free-and-easy fashion,
gradually improving her family by killing off the weaker members, and giving them as food to
the strong. It is a plan that has worked well--for the strong. When we interrogate Nature as
to the 'reason why' of her most marvelous contrivances, her answer has a grim simplicity. We
are like Red Riding-Hood when she drew back the bed-curtains and saw the wolfish countenance.--'What
is your great mouth made for, grandmother?'--'To eat you with, my dear.'

"To eat, while avoiding the unpleasant alternative of being eaten, is a motive that goes far
and explains much. The haps and mishaps of the hungry make up natural history. The eye of the
eagle is developed that it may see its prey from afar, its wings are strong that it may pounce
upon it, its beak and talons are sharpened that it may tear it in pieces. By right of these
superiorities, the eagle reigns as king among birds.

"The wings of the eagle, the sinews of the tiger, the brain of the man, are primarily weapons.
Each creature seizes the one that it finds at hand, and uses it for offense and defense. The
weapon is improved by use. The brain of the man has proved a better weapon than beak or talons,
and so it has come to pass that man is lord of creation. He is able to devour at will creatures
who once were his rivals.

"By using his brain, he has sought out many inventions. The sum total of these inventions we
call by the imposing name Civilization. It is a marvelously tempered weapon, in the hands of
the strong races. Alas, for the backward peoples who fall beneath it. One device after another
has been added for the extermination of the slow-witted.

"Even religion itself assumes to the anthropologist a sinister aspect. The strong nations have
always been religious. Their religion has helped them in their struggle for the mastery. There
are many unpleasant episodes in history. Spiritual wealth, like material wealth, is often predatory.

"In the Book of Judges there is a curious glimpse into a certain kind of religiousness. A man
of Mt. Ephraim named Micah had engaged a young Levite from Bethlehem-Judah as his spiritual
adviser. He promised him a modest salary, ten shekels of silver annually, and a suit of clothes,
and his board. On the way they seized Micah's priest. The strong get what they want and the
weak have to make the best of it. Micah, when he turned back from a hopeless conflict, was
a philosopher, and the young Levite when he went forward was a pietist. Both the philosophy
and the piety were by-products of the activity of the children of Dan.

"When we inquire too curiously about the origin of the things which we hold most precious,
we come to suspect that we are little better than the receivers of stolen goods. How could
it be otherwise with the descendants of a long line of freebooters? How are we to uphold the
family fortunes if we forsake the means by which they were obtained? Are we not fated by our
very constitutions to continue a predatory life?"

There are lovers of peace and of justice to whom such considerations appeal with tragic force.
They feel that moral ideals have arisen only to mock us, and to put us into hopeless antagonism
to the world in which we live. In the rude play of force, many things have been developed that
are useful in our struggle for existence. But one faculty has developed that is destined to
be our undoing,--it is Conscience. Natural history does not give any satisfactory account of
it. It runs counter to our other tendencies. It makes us miserable just when we are getting
the advantage of others. Now, getting the advantage of others we had understood was the whole
of the exciting game of life. To plot for this has marvelously sharpened human wit. But Conscience,
just at the critical moment, cries "For shame!" It is an awkward situation. Not only the rules
of the game, but the game itself, is called in question.

As a consequence, many conscientious persons lose all the zest of living. The existing world
seems to them brutal, its order, tyranny; its morality, organized selfishness; its accepted
religion, a shallow conventionality. In such a world as this, the good man stands like a gladiator
who has suddenly become a Christian. He is overwhelmed with horror at the bloody sports, yet
he is forced into the arena and must fight. That is his business, and he cannot rise above it.

I cannot, myself, take such a gloomy view of the interesting little planet on which I happen
to find myself. I take great comfort in the thought that the world is still unfinished, and
that what we see lying around us is not the completed product, but only the raw material. And
this consolation rises into positive cheer when I learn that there is a chance for us to take
a hand in the creative work. It matters very little at this stage of the proceedings whether
things are good or bad. The question for us is, What is the best use to which we can put them?
We are not to be bullied by facts. If we don't like them as they are, we may remould them nearer
to our heart's desire. At least we may try.

Here is my bayonet. A scientific gentleman, seeing it lying on my hearth, might construct a
very pretty theory about its owner. It
is the right of patronage of its rightful owner, the people of faith, or is somewhat reminiscent
of the early church. I believe that to this singular advantage must mainly attributed the phenomenon
(which is today and was not in time) of the coexistence Roman Catholicism with liberty and pure democratic
republic in the cantons of I am speaking Catholicism, practiced as it existed in the first centuries
of the church, is indeed a religion essentially democratic, because it is not only the religion
of fraternizing crowds, but also test the free will of the flock in the acceptance their pastors.
The habit of electing freely has been kept alive and persistent Uri, Schwyz and Nidwalden the democratic
feeling of the right of each and every one of the partners, because nothing so powerfully influences
on the ideas, customs, and institutions policies of a nation as religious practices and traditions.
These are the starting the man in possession of his conscience, and having a conscience free,
healthy and dignified in religion, can only have it on moral and political issues.

Another interesting phenomenon that shows in these counties corresponding
to the basins of lakes district in Zurich and the Four-cantons, is
the contrast between peoples political traditions not dissimilar in
race, language and religion, and whose borders are in fact imperceptible,
since the topography is smooth.

Indeed, they are in contact in these two lake basins of seven or eight cantons whose institutions
have differed and still differ greatly, and the spirit of its inhabitants. In Lucerne, the
trend has prevailed very aristocratic exaggerated and absolute centralization. In the half-cantons
of Nidwalden and Uri, Schwyz and Zug, pure democratic republic, decentralized to all districts.
In Glarus has governed worse than the aristocratic government: the most retrograde theocracy or
stagnant. Finally, Saint-Gall (formerly dominated by abbots and bishops) and district in Zurich,
has predominated tempered liberal spirit: that of the representative republic, which emanate
from any authority Legislative Assembly elected by the people.

How to explain such marked differences between similar populations that have almost the same history
and play an almost common ground? Explanation will be sought in isolation secular of a trade and
contact with other advanced nations?

This explanation is the less admissible because not square with the facts, which are absolutely
contradictory. For more I meditate, I can not find anything close to both the rational and
more general explanation the phenomenon as deduced from the religious traditions.
 We
could get along very nicely and, we are sure, quite healthfully, if it were not for our Things.
They set the pace for us, and we have to keep up.

We long for peace on earth, but of course we can't have it. Look at our warships and our forts
and our great guns. They are getting bigger every year. No sooner do we begin to have an amiable
feeling toward our neighbors than some one invents a more ingenious way by which we may slaughter
them. The march of invention is irresistible, and we are being swept along toward a great catastrophe.

We should like very much to do business according to the Golden Rule. It strikes us as being
the only decent method of procedure. We have no ill feeling toward our competitors. We should
be pleased to see them prosper. We have a strong preference for fair play. But of course we
can't have it, because the corporations, those impersonal products of modern civilization,
won't allow it. We must not meddle with them, for if we do we might break some of the laws
of political economy, and in that case nobody knows what might happen.

We have a great desire for good government. We should be gratified if we could believe that
the men who pave our streets, and build our school-houses, and administer our public funds,
are well qualified for their several positions. But we cannot, in a democracy, expect to have
expert service. The tendency of politics is to develop a Machine. The Machine is not constructed
to serve us. Its purpose is simply to keep itself going. When it once begins to move, it is
only prudent in us to keep out of the way. It would be tragical to have it run over us.

So, in certain moods, we sit and grumble over our formidable fetiches. Like all idolaters,
we sometimes turn iconoclasts. In a short-lived fit of anger we smash the Machine. Having accomplished
this feat, we feel a little foolish, for we don't know what to do next.

Fortunately for the world there are those who are neither idolaters nor iconoclasts. They do
not worship Things, nor fear them, nor despise them,--they simply use them.

In the Book of Baruch there is inserted a letter purporting to be from Jeremiah to the Hebrew
captives in Babylon. The prophet discourses on the absurdity of the worship of inanimate things,
and incidentally draws on his experience in gardening. An idol, he says, is "like to a white
thorn in an orchard, that every bird sitteth upon." It is as powerless, he says, to take the
initiative "as a scarecrow in a garden of cucumbers that keepeth nothing." In his opinion,
one wide-awake man in the cucumber patch is worth all the scarecrows that were ever constructed.
"Better therefore is the just man that hath none idols."

What brave air we breathe when we join the company of the just men who have freed themselves
from idolatry! Listen to Governor Bradford as he enumerates the threatening facts which the
Pilgrims to New England faced. He mentions all the difficulties which they foresaw, and then
adds, "It was answered that all great and honorable actions were accompanied with great difficulties,
and must be enterprised with answerable courages."

What fine spiritual audacity! Not courage, if you please, but courages. There is much virtue
in the plural. It was as much as to say, "All our eggs are not in one basket. We are likely
to meet more than one kind of danger. What of it? We have more than one kind of courage. It
is well to be prepared for emergencies."

It was the same spirit which made William Penn speak of his colony on the banks of the Delaware
as the "Holy Experiment." In his testimony to George Fox, he says, "He was an original and
no man's copy. He had not learned what he said by study. Nor were they notional nor speculative,
but sensible and practical, the setting up of the Kingdom of God in men's hearts, and the way
of it was his work. His authority was inward and not outward, and he got it and kept it by
the love of God. He was a divine and a naturalist, and all of God Almighty's making."

In the presence of men of such moral originality, ethical problems take on a new and exciting
aspect. What is to happen next? You cannot find out by noting the trend of events. A peep into
a resourceful mind would be more to the purpose. That mind perceives possibilities beyond the
ken of a duller intelligence.

I should like to have some competent person give us a History of Moral Progress as a part of
the History of Invention. I know there is a distrust of Invention on the part of many good
people who are so enamored of the ideal of a simple life that they are suspicious of civilization.
The text from Ecclesiastes, "God made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions,"
has been used to discourage any budding Edisons of the spiritual realm. Dear old Alexander
Cruden inserted in his Concordance a delicious definition of invention as here used: "Inventions:
New ways of making one's self more wise and happy than God made us."

It is astonishing how many people share this fear that, if they exert their minds too much,
they may become better than the Lord intended them to be. A new way of being good, or of doing
good, terrifies them. Nevertheless moral progress follows the same lines as all other progress.
First there is a conscious need. Necessity is the mother of invention. Then comes the patient
search for the ways and means through which the want may be satisfied. Ages may elapse before
an ideal may be realized. Numberless attempts must be made, the lessons of the successive failures
must be learned. It is in the ability to draw the right inference from failure that inventive
genius is seen.

"It would be madness and inconsistency," said Lord Bacon, "to suppose that things which have
never yet been performed can be performed without using some hitherto untried means." The inventor
is not discouraged by past failures, but he is careful not to repeat them slavishly. He may
be compelled to use the same elements, but he is always trying some new combination. If he
must fail once more, he sees to it that it shall be in a slightly different way. He has learned
in twenty ways how the thing cannot be done. This information is very useful to him, and he
does not begrudge the labor by which it has been obtained. All this is an excellent preparation
for the twenty-first attempt, which may possibly reveal the way it can be done. When thousands
of good heads are working upon a problem in this fashion, something happens.

For several generations the physical sciences have offered the most inviting field for inventive
genius. Here have been seen the triumphs of the experimental method. There are, however, evidences
that many of the best intellects are turning to the fascinating field of morals. Indeed, the
very success of physical research makes this inevitable.

When in 1783 the brothers Montgolfier ascended a mile above the earth in a balloon there was
a thrill of excitement, as the spectators felt that the story of Dædalus had been taken from
the world of romance into the world of fact. But, after all, the invention went only a little
way in the direction of the navigation of the air. It is one thing to float, and another thing
to steer a craft toward a desired haven. The balloon having been invented, the next and more
difficult task was to make it dirigible. It was the same problem that had puzzled the inventors
of primitive times who had discovered that, by making use of a proper log, they could be carried
from place to place on the water. What the landing place should be was, however, a matter beyond
their control. They had to trust to the current, which was occasionally favorable to them.
In the first exhilaration over their discovery they were doubtless thankful enough to go down
stream, even when their business called them up stream. At least they had the pleasant sensation
of getting on. They were obeying the law of progress. The uneasy radical who wanted to progress
in a predetermined direction must have seemed like a visionary. But the desire to go up stream
and across stream and beyond sea persisted, and the log became a boat, and paddles and oars
and rudder and sail and screw propeller were invented in answer to the ever increasing demand.

But the problem of the dirigibility of a boat, or of a balloon, is simplicity itself compared
with the amazing complexity of the problems involved in producing a dirigible civilization.
It falls under Bacon's category of "things which never yet have been performed." Heretofore
civilizations have floated on the cosmic atmosphere. They have been carried about by mysterious
currents till they could float no longer. Then their wreckage has furnished materials for history.

But all the time human ingenuity has been at work attacking the great problem. Thousands of
little inventions have been made, by which we gain temporary control of some of the processes.
We are coming to have a consciousness of human society as a whole, and of the possibility of
directing its progress. It is not enough to satisfy the modern intellect to devise plans by
which we may become more rich or more powerful. We must also tax our ingenuity to find ways
for the equitable division of the wealth and the just use of power. We are no longer satisfied
with increase in the vast unwieldy bulk of our possessions, we eagerly seek to direct them
to definite ends. Even here in America we are beginning to feel that "progress" is not an end
in itself. Whether it is desirable or not, depends on the direction of it. Our glee over the
census reports is chastened. We are not so certain that it is a clear gain to have a million
people live where a few thousand lived before. We insist on asking, How do they live? Are they
happier, healthier, wiser? As a city becomes bigger, does it become a better place in which
to rear children? If it does not, must not civic ambition seek to remedy the defect? In so
far as that is true to-day, things are working badly. It must be within our power to remedy
such an absurd situation. We have to devise more efficient means for securing fair play, and
for enforcing the rules of the game. We want to develop a better breed of men. In order to
do so, we must make this the first consideration. In proportion as the end is clearly conceived
and ardently desired, will the effective means be discovered and employed.

Why has the reign of peace and good-will upon the earth been so long delayed?

The answer must be that "the valiant man and free" must, like every one else, learn his business
before he can expect to have any measure of success. The kindlier hand must be skilled by long
practice before it can direct the vast social mechanism. Here are all the materials for a more
beautiful world. All that is needed is to find the proper combination. Goodness alone will
not do the work. Goodness grown strong and wise by much experience is, as the man on the street
would say, "quite a different proposition." Why not try it?

We may not live to see any dramatic entrance of the world upon "the thousand years of peace,"
but we are living in a time when men are rapidly learning the art of doing peacefully many
things which once were done with infinite strife and confusion. We live in a time when intelligence
is applied to the work of love. The children of light are less content than they once were
to be outranked in sagacity by the children of this world. The result is that many things which
once were the dreams of saints and sages have come within the field of practical business and
practical politics. They are a part of the day's work. A person of active temperament may prefer
to live in this stirring period, rather than to have his birth postponed to the millennium.

It is only the incorrigible doctrinaire who refuses to sympathize with the illogical processes
by which the world is gradually being made better. With him it is the millennium or nothing.
He will tolerate no indirect approach. He will give no credit for partial approximations. He
insists on holding every one strictly to his first fault. There shall be no wriggling out of
a false position, no gradual change in function, no adaptations of old tools to new uses.

In the next essay I shall have something to say about this way of looking at things. It would
do no harm to stir up the doctrinaire assumptions with the bayonet-poker.

II

On Being a Doctrinaire

The question is sometimes asked by those who devise tests of literary taste, "If you were cast
upon a desert island and were allowed but one book, what book would you choose?"

If I were in such a predicament I should say to the pirate chief who was about to maroon me,
"My dear sir, as this island seems, for the time being, to have been overlooked by Mr. Andrew
Carnegie, I must ask the loan of a volume from your private library. And if it is convenient
for you to allow me but one volume at a time, I pray that it may be the Unabridged Dictionary."

I should choose the Unabridged Dictionary, not only because it is big, but because it is mentally
filling. One has the sense of rude plenty such as one gets from looking at the huge wheat elevators
in Minneapolis. Here are the harvests of innumerable fields stored up in little space. There
are not only vast multitudes of words, but each word means something, and each has a history
of its own, and a family relation which it is interesting to trace.

But that which I should value most on my desert island would be the opportunity of acquainting
myself with the fine distinctions which are made between different human qualities. It would
seem that the Aggregate Mind which made the language is much cleverer than we usually suppose.
The most minute differences are infallibly registered in tell-tale words. There are not only
words denoting the obvious differences between the good and the bad, the false and the true,
the beautiful and the ugly, but there are words which indicate the delicate shades of goodness
and truth and beauty as they are curiously blended with variable quantities of badness and
falseness and ugliness. There are not only words which tell what you are, but words which tell
what you think you are, and what other people think you are, and what you think they are when
you discover that they are thinking that you are something which you think you are not.

In the bright lexicon of youth there is no such word as "fail," but the dictionary makes up
for this deficiency. It is particularly rich in words descriptive of our failures. As the procession
of the virtues passes by, there are pseudo-virtues that tag on like the small boys who follow
the circus. After Goodness come Goodiness and Goody-goodiness; we see Sanctity and Sanctimoniousness,
Piety and Pietism, Grandeur and Grandiosity, Sentiment and Sentimentality. When we try to show
off we invariably deceive ourselves, but usually we deceive nobody else. Everybody knows that
we are showing off, and if we do it well they give us credit for that.

A scholar has a considerable amount of sound learning, and he is afraid that his fellow citizens
may not fully appreciate it. So in his conversation he allows his erudition to leak out, with
the intent that the stranger should say, "What a modest, learned man he is, and what a pleasure
it is to meet him." Only the stranger does not express himself in that way, but says, "What
an admirable pedant he is, to be sure." Pedantry is a well-recognized compound, two thirds
sound learning and one third harmless vanity.

Sometimes on the street you see a man whom you take for an old acquaintance. You approach with
outstretched hand and expectant countenance, but his stony glare of non-recognition gives you
pause. The fact that he does not know you gives you time to perceive that you do not know him
and have never seen him before. A superficial resemblance has deceived you. In the dictionary
you may find many instances of such mistakes in the moral realm.

One of the most common of these mistakes in identity is the confusion of the Idealist and the
Doctrinaire. An idealist is defined as "one who pursues and dwells upon the ideal, a seeker
after the highest beauty and good." A doctrinaire may do this also, but he is differentiated
as "one who theorizes without sufficient regard for practical considerations, one who undertakes
to explain things by a narrow theory or group of theories."

The Idealist is the kind of man we need. He is not satisfied with things as they are. He is one

     Whose soul sees the perfect
       Which his eyes seek in vain.

If a more perfect society is to come, it must be through the efforts of persons capable of
such visions. Our schools, churches, and all the institutions of a higher civilization have
as their chief aim the production of just such personalities. But why are they not more successful?
What becomes of the thousands of young idealists who each year set forth on the quest for the
highest beauty and truth? Why do they tire so soon of the quest and sink into the ranks of
the spiritually unemployed.

The answer is that many persons who set out to be idealists end by becoming doctrinaires. They
identify the highest beauty and truth with their own theories. After that they make no further
excursions into the unexplored regions of reality, for fear that they may discover their identification
to have been incomplete.

The Doctrinaire is like a mason who has mixed his cement before he is ready to use it. When
he is ready the cement has set, and he can't use it. It sticks together, but it won't stick
to anything else. George Eliot describes such a predicament in her sketch of the Reverend Amos
Barton. Mr. Barton's plans, she says, were, like his sermons, "admirably well conceived, had
the state of the case been otherwise."

By eliminating the "state of the case," the Doctrinaire is enabled to live the simple life--intellectually
and ethically. The trouble is that it is too simple. To his mind the question, "Is it true?"
is never a disturbing one, nor does it lead to a troublesome investigation of matters of fact.
His definition of truth has the virtue of perfect simplicity,--"A truth is that which has got
itself believed by me." His thoughts form an exclusive club, and when a new idea applies for
admission it is placed on the waiting list. A single black-ball from an old member is sufficient
permanently to exclude it. When an idea is once in, it has a very pleasant time of it. All
the opinions it meets with are clubable, and on good terms with one another. Whether any of
them are related to any reality outside their own little circle would be a question that it
would be impolite to ask. It would be like asking a correctly attired member who was punctilious
in paying his club dues, whether he had also paid his tailor. To the Doctrinaire there seems
something sordid and vulgar in the anxiety to make the two ends--theory and practice--meet.
It seems to indicate that one is not intellectually in comfortable circumstances.

The Doctrinaire, when he has conceived certain ideals, is not content that they should be cast
upon the actual world, to take their chances in the rough-and-tumble struggle for existence,
proving their right to the kingdom by actually conquering it, inch by inch. He cannot endure
such tedious delays. He must have the satisfaction of seeing his ideals instantly realized.
The ideal life must be lived under ideal conditions. And so, for his private satisfaction,
he creates for himself such a world into which he retires.

It is a world of natural law, as he understands natural law. There are no exceptions, no deviation
from general principles, no shadings off, no fascinating obscurities, no rude practical jokes,
no undignified by-play, no "east windows of divine surprise," no dark unfathomable abysses.
He would not allow such things. In his world the unexpected never happens. The endless chain
of causation runs smoothly. Every event has a cause, and the cause is never tangled up with
the effect, so that you cannot tell where one begins and the other ends. He is intellectually
tidy, and everything must be in its place. If something turns up for which he cannot find a
place, he sends it to the junk shop.

When the Doctrinaire descends from the homogeneous world which he has constructed, into the
actual world which, in the attempt to get itself made, is becoming more amazingly heterogeneous
all the time, he is in high dudgeon. The existence of these varied contradictorinesses seems
to him a personal affront.

It is as if a person had lived in a natural history museum, where every stuffed animal knew
his place, and had his scientific name painted on the glass case. He is suddenly dropped into
a tropical jungle where the animals act quite differently. The tigers won't "stay put," and
are liable to turn up just when he doesn't want to see them.

I should not object to his unpreparedness for the actual state of things if the Doctrinaire
did not assume the airs of a superior person. He lays all the blame for the discrepancy between
himself and the universe on the universe. He has the right key, only the miserable locks won't
fit it. Having formed a very clear conception of the best possible world, he looks down patronizingly
upon the commonplace people who are trying to make the best out of this imperfect world. Having
large possessions in Utopia, he lives the care-free life of an absentee landlord. His praise
is always for the dead, or for the yet unborn; when he looks on his contemporaries he takes
a gloomy view. That any great man should be now alive, he considers a preposterous assumption.
He treats greatness as if it were a disease to be determined only by post-mortem examination.

One of the earliest satires on the character of the Doctrinaire is to be found in the Book
of Jonah. Jonah was a prophet by profession. He received a call to preach in the city of Nineveh,
which he accepted after some hesitation. He denounced civic corruption and declared that in
forty days the city would be destroyed. Having performed this professional duty, Jonah felt
that there was nothing left for him but to await with pious resignation the fulfillment of
his prophecy. But in this case the unexpected happened, the city repented and was saved. This
was gall and wormwood to Jonah. His orderly mind was offended by the disarrangement of his
schedule. What was the use of being a prophet if things did not turn out as he said? So we
are told "it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was angry," Still he clung to the hope that,
in the end, things might turn out badly enough to justify his public utterances.

Poor grumpy old Jonah! Have we not sat under his preaching, and read his editorials, and pondered
his books, full of solemn warnings of what will happen to us if we do not mend our ways? We
have been deeply impressed, and in a great many respects we have mended our ways, and things
have begun to go better. But Jonah takes no heed of our repentance. He is only thinking of
those prophecies of his. Just in proportion as things begin to look up morally, he gets low
in his mind and begins to despair of the Republic.

The trouble with Jonah is that he can see but one thing at a time, and see that only in one
way. He cannot be made to appreciate the fact that "the world is full of a number of things,"
and that some of them are not half bad. When he sees a dangerous tendency he thinks that it
will necessarily go on to its logical conclusion. He forgets that there is such a thing as
the logic of events, which is different from the logical processes of a person who sits outside
and prognosticates. There is one tendency which all tendencies have in common, that is, to
develop counter tendencies.

There is, for example, a tendency on the part of the gypsy-moth caterpillar to destroy utterly
the forests of the United States. But were I addressing a thoughtful company of these caterpillars
I should urge them to look upon their own future with modest self-distrust. However well their
programme looks upon paper, it cannot be carried out without opposition. Long before the last
tree has been vanquished, the last of the gypsy moths may be fighting for its life against
the enemies it has made.

The Doctrinaire is very quick at generalizing. This is greatly to his credit. One of the powers
of the human mind on which we set great store is that of entertaining general ideas. This is
where we think we have the advantage of the members of the brute creation. They have particular
experiences which at the time are very exciting to them, but they have no abstract notions,--or,
at least, no way of expressing them to us. We argue that if they really had these ideas they
would have invented language long ago, and by this time would have had Unabridged Dictionaries
of their own. But we humans do not have to be content with this hand-to-mouth way of thinking
and feeling. When we see a hundred things that strike us as being more or less alike, we squeeze
them together into one mental package, and give a single name to the whole lot. This is a great
convenience and enables us to do our thinking on a large scale. By organizing our various impressions
into a union, and inducing them to work together, we are enabled to do collective bargaining
with the Universe.

If, for example, I were asked to tell what I think of the individuals inhabiting the United
States, I should have to give it up. Assuming a round eighty million persons, all of whom it
would be a pleasure to meet, there must be, at the lowest computation, seventy-nine million,
nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand, three hundred and seventy-five people of whose characters
I do not know enough to make my opinion of any value. Of the remaining fragment of the population,
my knowledge is not so perfect as I would wish. As for the whole eighty million, suppose I
had to give a single thought to each person, I have not enough cogitations to go around.

What we do is to stop the ruinous struggle of competing thoughts by recognizing a community
of interests and forming a merger, under the collective term "American." Then all difficulties
are minimized. Almost all our theorizing about human affairs is carried on by means of these
symbols. Millions of different personalities are merged in one mental picture. We talk of a
class even more readily than we talk of an individual.

This is all very well so long as we do not take these generalizations too seriously. The mistake
of the Doctrinaire lies not in classifying people, but in treating an individual as if he could
belong to only one class at a time. The fact is that each one of us belongs to a thousand classes.
There are a great many ways of classifying human beings, and as in the case of the construction
of tribal lays, "every single one of them is right," as far as it goes. You may classify people
according to race, color, previous condition of servitude, height, weight, shape of their skulls,
amount of their incomes, or their ability to write Latin verse. The two steep hills Rossberg and
Rigi were still perfectly black, hooded by phalanxes of dark clouds that seemed attached to
the crêpe dark fir forests, the majesty of doubling the naked peaks and precipices timid. Finally,
in the middle of the sidewall of the two opposite mountains, lay the ends of a huge rainbow,
the most perfect and bright I've seen, lying on the valley and lake, from one side to another,
such as an air bridge raised to make way above the abyss of light to a legion of fairies or
invisible spirits. I have not ever seen such a small space in a spectacle of nature witchcraft so sudden,
great and varied as the look there for ten minutes.

The rocky slope, parched and choked a little before the August sun, was intoxicated with the
bathroom of the storm, and when we were barely visible progress in humidity signals the soil,
the green patch of grass beads, braids hair bright liquid Leaves falling from the conical
firs, and doubled flow of some streams that were lost jumping into waterfalls hidden in the
depths of the forest and depths. The air was filled with the richest perfumes thickets of ferns
sacudian their wet manes on the wings of the wind, and wild rumors concert rose the bosom of the
deep gullies or streams would gather the sound of bells waving cows and goats to roam the broken
patch of grass on the mountain, eating with eagerness and delight the grass wet.

From the hostel where we had defended the storm begins a series of
chapels or niches (12 or 13) placed at certain distances in more or
less picturesque sites, to the edge the road.

If all the Catholic cantons abound on the roads these signs of worship religious rises in Rigi,
and especially that of Goldau make an important role. On the one hand mark the seasons of the
pilgrims going to visit Our Lady of Snow, on the other to serve as rookeries unhappy begging
to disabled passengers and do during the summer months its full-year provision.

A short distance from the summit of Rigi delay in the middle of forests and very rough patch of grass
Hospice of the famous Notre-Dame, much revered for the miracles of
the Virgin Nieves attributed to him and inhabited by three or four
friars.

At around the chapel and Hospice highlight many inns, some substantial and attractive appearance,
inhabited by a whole population of people nervous and sickly women who are going to be cured
with sera exercise and fresh air. There was less than two hundred people staying there when
we pass, and judging by their warm familiarity ought to be so pleasant residence. Forty minutes
after we got to the eminence of Staffel, a kind of introduction to the higher call Kulm. They
bring together the three main roads that lead opposite points to the top, and the traveler
is suddenly in the presence of a superb picture, leaving the Road closed basin to a small plateau
that records the entire view canton of Lucerne and part of Unterwalden. Half an hour later,
walking on the back naked from the mountain, we went to get down to the door of great Rigi-Kulm
hotel that is the highest point of the mountain and the end of the excursion.

Nothing is more curious than European Babel built on such a high summit, amid a swarm of lakes,
valleys and mountains in the center of the free and picturesque Switzerland.
 Your
views on page 142 are so sound that he longs to continue the conversation into what had before
seemed the more important matter contained in page 143. But etiquette forbids. It is your royal
prerogative to confine yourself to the safe precincts of page 142, and you leave it to his
imagination to conceive the wisdom which might have been given to the world had it been your
pleasure to expound the whole subject of archæology.

I had myself, in a very humble way, an experience of this kind. In a domestic crisis it was
necessary to placate a newly arrived and apparently homesick cook. I am unskilled in diplomacy,
but it was a case where the comfort of an innocent family depended on diplomatic action. I
learned that the young woman came from Prince Edward Island. Up to that moment I confess that
Prince Edward Island had been a mere geographical expression. All my ideas about it were wrong,
I having mixed it up with Cape Breton, which as I now know is quite different. But instantly
Prince Edward Island became a matter of intense interest. Our daily bread was dependent on
it. I entered my study and with atlas and encyclopædia sought to atone for the negligence of
years. I learned how Prince Edward Island lay in relation to Nova Scotia, what were its principal
towns, its climate, its railroad and steam-boat connections, and acquired enough miscellaneous
information to adorn a five-minutes personally conducted conversation. Thus freshly furnished
forth, I adventured into the kitchen.

Did she take the boat from Georgetown to Pictou? She did. Isn't it too bad that the strait
is sometimes frozen over in winter? It is. Some people cross to New Brunswick on ice boats
from Cape Traverse; that must be exciting and rather cold. She thought so too. Did she come
from Charlottetown? No. Out Tignish way? Yes; halfway from Charlottetown to Tignish. Queen's
County? Good apple country? Yes, she never saw such good apples as they raise in Queen's County.
When I volunteered the opinion that the weather on Prince Edward Island is fine but changeable,
I was received on the footing of an old inhabitant.

I did not find it necessary to go to the limits of my knowledge. I had still several reserve
facts, classified in the Encyclopædia under the heads, Geology, Administration, and Finance.
I had established my position as a superior person with an intuitive knowledge of Prince Edward
Island. If the Encyclopædia itself had walked into the kitchen arm in arm with the Classical
Dictionary, she could not have been more impressed. At least, that is the way I like to think
she felt. It is the way I feel under similar circumstances.

One watches the Superior Person leading a conversation with the admiration due to Browning's
Hervé Riel, when,

     As its inch of way were the wide sea's profound,

he steered the ship in the narrow channel. It is well, however, for one who undertakes such
feats to make sure that he really has an inch of way; it is none too much.

In these days it is so easy for one to get a supply of ready-made knowledge that it is hard
to keep from applying it indiscriminately. We make incursions into our neighbor's affairs and
straighten them out with a ruthless righteousness which is very disconcerting to him, especially
when he has never had the pleasure of our acquaintance till we came to set him right. There
is a certain modesty of conscience which would perhaps be more becoming. It comes only with
the realization of practical difficulties. I like the remark of Sir Fulke Greville in his account
of his friend, Sir Philip Sydney. Speaking of his literary labors he says: "Since my declining
age it is true I had for some years more leisure to discover their imperfections than care
and industry to mend them, finding in myself what all men complain of: that it is more easy
to find fault, excuse, or tolerate, than to examine or reform."

The idea that we know what a person ought to do, and especially what he ought not to do, before
we know the person or how he is situated, is one dear to the mind of the Doctrinaire. If his
mind did not naturally work that way he would not be a Doctrinaire. He is always inclined to
put duty before the pleasure of finding out what it is all about. In this way he becomes overstocked
with a lot of unrelated duties, for which there is no home consumption, and which he endeavors
to dump on the foreign market. This makes him unpopular.

I am not one of those who insist that everybody should mind his own business; that is too harsh
a doctrine. One of the rights and privileges of a good neighbor is to give neighborly advice.
But there is a corresponding right on the part of the advisee, and that is to take no more
of the advice than he thinks is good for him. There is one thing that a man knows about his
own business better than any outsider, and that is how hard it is for him to do it. The adviser
is always telling him how to do it in the finest possible way, while he, poor fellow, knows
that the paramount issue is whether he can do it at all. It requires some grace on the part
of a person who is doing the best he can under extremely difficult circumstances to accept
cheerfully the remarks of the intelligent critic.

Persons who write about the wild animals they have known are likely to be contradicted by persons
who have been acquainted with other wild animals, or with the same wild animals under other
circumstances. How much more difficult is it to give an exhaustive and correct account of that
wonderfully complex creature, man.

One whose business requires him to meet large numbers of persons who are all in the same predicament,
is in danger of generalizing from a too narrow experience. The teacher, the charity-worker,
the preacher, the physician, the man of business, each has his method of professional classification.
Each is tempted to forget that he is not in a position from which he can survey human nature
in its entirety. He only sees one phase endlessly repeated. The dentist, for example, has special
advantages for character study, but he should remember that the least heroic of his patients
has moments when he is more blithe and debonair than he has ever seen him.

It takes an unusually philosophical mind to make the necessary allowances for its own limitations.
If you were to earn your daily bread at the Brooklyn Bridge, and your sole duty was to exhort
your fellow men to "step lively," you would doubtless soon come to divide mankind into three
classes, namely: those who step lively, those who do not step lively, and those who step too
lively. If Aristotle himself were to cross the bridge, you would see nothing in the Peripatetic
Philosopher but a reprehensible lack of agility.

At the railway terminus there is an office which bears the inscription, "Lost Articles." In
the midst of the busy traffic it stands as a perpetual denial of the utilitarian theory that
all men are governed by enlightened self-interest. A very considerable proportion of the traveling
public can be trusted regularly to forget its portable property.

The gentleman who presides over the lost articles has had long experience as an alienist. He
is skeptical as to the reality of what is called mind. So far as his clients are concerned,
it is notable for its absence. To be confronted day after day by the absent-minded, and to
listen to their monotonous tale of woe, is disenchanting. It is difficult to observe all the
amenities of life when one is dealing with the defective and delinquent classes.

When first I inquired at the Lost Article window, I was received as a man and brother. There
was even an attempt to show the respect due to one who may have seen better days. I had the
feeling that both myself and my lost article were receiving individual attention. I left without
any sense of humiliation. But the third time I appeared I was conscious of a change in the
atmosphere. A single glance at the Restorer of Lost Articles showed me that I was no longer
in his eyes a citizen who was in temporary misfortune. I was classified. He recognized me as
a rounder. "There he is again," he said to himself. "Last time it was at Rockingham Junction,
this time it is probably on the Saugus Branch; but it is the same old story, and the same old
umbrella."

What hurt my feelings was that nothing I could say would do any good. It would not help matters
to explain that losing articles was not my steady occupation, and that I had other interests
in life. He would only wearily note the fact as another indication of my condition. "That's
the way they all talk. These defectives can never be made to see their conduct in its true
light. They always explain their misfortunes by pretending that their thoughts were on higher
things."

The Doctrinaire when he gets hold of a good thing never lets up on it. His favorite idea is
produced on all occasions. It may be excellent in its way, but he sings its praises till we
turn against it as we used to do in the Fourth Reader Class, when we all with one accord turned
against "Teacher's Pet." Teacher's Pet might be dowered with all the virtues, but we of the
commonality would have none of them. We chose to scoff at an excellence that insulted us.

The King in "Hamlet" remarked,

     "There lives within the very flame of love
     A kind of wick, or snuff, that will abate it;
     And nothing is at a like goodness still;
     For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
     Dies in his own too-much."

The Doctrinaire can never realize the fatal nature of the "too-much." If a little does good,
he is sure that more will do better. He will not allow of any abatements or alleviations; we
must, if we are to keep on good terms with him, be doing the whole duty of man all the time.
He will take our own most cherished principles and turn them against us in such an offensive
manner that we forget that they are ours. He argues on the right side with such uncompromising
energy that we have to take the wrong side to maintain our self-respect.

If there is one thing I believe in, it is fresh air. I like to keep my window open at night,
or better still to sleep under the stars. And I was glad to learn from the doctors that this
is good for us. But the other day I started on a railway journey with premonitory signs of
catching cold. An icy blast blew upon me. I closed the car window. A lady instantly opened
it. I looked to see what manner of person she was. Was she one who could be touched by an illogical
appeal? or was she wholly devoted to a cause?

It needed but a glance to assure me that she was a Doctrinaire, and capable only of seeing
the large public side of the question. What would it avail for me to say, "Madam, I am catching
cold, may I close the window?"

"Apostate man!" she would reply, "did I not hear you on the platform of the Anti-Tuberculosis
Association plead for free and unlimited ventilation without waiting for the consent of other
nations? Did you not appear as one who stood four-square 'gainst every wind that blows, and
asked for more? And now, just because you are personally inconvenienced, you prove recreant
to the Cause. Do you know how many cubic feet of fresh air are necessary to this car?"

I could only answer feebly, "When it comes to cubic feet I am perfectly sound. I wish there
were more of them. What troubles me is only a trifling matter of two linear inches on the back
of my neck. Your general principle, Madam, is admirable. I merely plead for a slight relaxation
of the rule. I ask only for a mere pittance of warmed-over air."

Perhaps the most discouraging thing about the Doctrinaire is that while he insists upon a high
ideal, he is intolerant of the somewhat tedious ways and means by which the ideal is to be
reached. With his eye fixed on the Perfect, he makes no allowance for the imperfectness of
those who are struggling toward it. There is a pleasant passage in Hooker's "Ecclesiastical
Polity" in which I find great comfort: "That which the Gospel of Christ requireth is the perpetuity
of virtuous duties, not the perpetuity of exercise or action, but disposition perpetual, and
practise as often as times and opportunities require. Just, valiant, liberal, temperate, and
holy men, are they which can whensoever they will, and will whensoever they ought, execute
whatever their several perfections impart. If virtues did always cease when they cease to work,
there would be nothing more pernicious to virtue than sleep."

The judicious Hooker was never more judicious than in making this observation. It is a great
relief to be assured that in this world, where there are such incessant calls upon the moral
nature, it is possible to be a just, valiant, liberal, temperate, and holy man, and yet get
a good night's sleep.

But your Doctrinaire will not have it so. His hero retains his position only during good behavior,
which means behaving all the time in an obviously heroic manner. It is not enough that he should
be to "true occasion true," he must make occasions to show himself off.

Now it happens that in the actual world it is not possible for the best of men to satisfy all
the demands of their fidgety followers. In the picture of the battle between St. George and
the dragon, the attitude of St. George is all that could be desired. There is an easy grace
in the way in which he deals with the dragon that is greatly to his credit. There is a mingling
of knightly pride and Christian resignation over his own inevitable victory, that is charming.

St. George was fortunate in the moment when he had his picture taken. He had the dragon just
where he wanted him. But it is to be feared that if some one had followed him with a kodak,
some of the snap-shots might have been less satisfactory. Let us suppose a moment when the dragon

     Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail.

It is a way that dragons have when they are excited. And what if that moment St. George dodged.
Would you criticise him harshly for such an action? Would it not be better to take into consideration
the fact that under such circumstances his first duty might not be to be statuesque?

When in the stern conflict we have found a champion, I think we owe him some little encouragement.
When he is doing the best he can in a very difficult situation, we ought not to blame him because
he does not act as he would if there were no difficulties at all. "Life," said Marcus Aurelius,
"is more like wrestling than dancing." When we get that point of view we may see that some
attitudes that are not graceful may be quite effective. It is a fine thing to say,--

     "Dare to be a Daniel,
     Dare to stand alone,
     Dare to have a purpose true
     And dare to make it known."

But if I had been a Daniel and as the result of my independent action had been cast into the
den of lions, I should feel as if I had done enough in the way of heroism for one day, and
I should let other people take their turn. If I found the lions inclined to be amiable, I should
encourage them in it. I should say, "I beg your pardon. I do not mean to intrude. If it's the
time for your afternoon nap, don't pay any attention to me. After the excitement that I've
had where I came from, I should like nothing better than to sit down by myself in the shade
and have a nice quiet day of it."

And if the lions were agreeable, I should be glad. I should hate to have at this moment a bland
Doctrinaire look down and say, "That was a great thing you did up there, Daniel. People are
wondering whether you can keep it up. Your friends are getting a mite impatient. They expected
to hear by this time that there was something doing down there. Stir 'em up, Daniel! Stir 'em up!"

Perhaps at this point some fair-minded reader may say, "Is there not something to be said in
favor of the Doctrinaire? Is he not, after all, a very useful character? How could any great
reform be pushed through without his assistance?"

Yes, dear reader, a great deal may be said in his favor. He is often very useful. So is a snow-plough,
in midwinter, though I prefer a more flexible implement when it comes to cultivating my early peas.

There is something worse than to be a Doctrinaire who pursues an ideal without regard to practical
consideration; it is worse to be a Philistine so immersed in practical considerations that
he doesn't know an ideal when he sees it. If the choice were between these two I should say,
"Keep on being a Doctrinaire. You have chosen the better part." But fortunately there is a
still more excellent way. It is possible to be a practical idealist pursuing the ideal with
full regard for practical considerations. There is something better than the conscience that
moves with undeviating rectitude through a moral vacuum. It is the conscience that is related
to realities. It is a moral force operating continuously on the infinitely diversified materials
of human life. It feels its way onward. It takes advantage of every incident, with a noble
opportunism. It is the conscience that belongs to the patient, keen-witted, open-minded, cheery
"men of good will," who are doing the hard work of the world.

III

Christmas and the Literature of Disillusion

"What makes the book so cross?" asked the youngest listener, who had for a few minutes, for
lack of anything better to do, been paying some slight attention to the reading that was intended
for her elders.

It was a question which we had not been bright enough to ask. We had been plodding on with
the vague idea that it was a delightful book. Certainly the subject was agreeable. The writer
was taking us on a ramble through the less frequented parts of Italy. He had a fine descriptive
power, and made us see the quiet hill towns, the old walls, the simple peasants, the white
Umbrian cattle in the fields. It was just the sort of thing that should have brought peace
to the soul; but it didn't.

The author had the trick of rubbing his subject the wrong way. Everything he saw seemed to
suggest something just the opposite. When every prospect pleased, he took offense at something
that wasn't there. He was himself a favored man of leisure, and could go where he pleased and
stay as long as he liked. Instead of being content with a short Pharisaic prayer of thanksgiving
that he was not as other men, he turned to berate the other men, who in New York were, at that
very moment, rushing up and down the crowded streets in the frantic haste to be rich. He treated
their fault as his misfortune. Indeed, it was unfortunate that the thought of their haste should
spoil the serenity of his contemplation. His fine sense for the precious in art led him to
seek the untrodden ways. He indulged in bitter gibes at the poor taste of the crowd. In some
far-away church, just as he was getting ready to enjoy a beautifully faded picture on the wall,
he caught sight of a tourist. He was only a mild-mannered man with an apologetic air, as one
who would say, "Let me look, too. I mean no harm."

It was a meek effort at appreciation, but to the gentleman who wrote the book it was an offense.
Here was a spy from "the crowd," an emissary of "the modern." By and by the whole pack would
be in full cry and the lovely solitude would be no more. Then the author wandered off through
the olives, where under the unclouded Italian sky he could see the long line of the Apennines,
and there he meditated on the insufferable smoke of Sheffield and Pittsburg.

The young critic was right, the author was undoubtedly "cross." In early childhood this sort
of thing is well understood, and called by its right name. When a small person starts the day
in a contradictory mood and insists on taking everything by the wrong handle,--he is not allowed
to flatter himself that he is a superior person with a "temperament," or a fine thinker with
a gift for righteous indignation. He is simply set down as cross. It is presumed that he got
up the wrong way, and he is advised to try again and see if he cannot do better. If he is fortunate
enough to be thrown into the society of his contemporaries, he is subjected to a course of
salutary discipline. No mercy is shown to "cross-patch." He cannot present his personal grievances
to the judgment of his peers, for his peers refuse to listen. After a while he becomes conscious
that his wrath defeats itself, as he hears the derisive couplet:--

     "Johnny's mad.
     And I am glad."

What's the use of being unpleasant any longer if it only produces such unnatural gayety in
others. At last, as a matter of self-defense, he puts on the armor of good humor, which alone
is able to protect him from the assaults of his adversaries.

But when a person has grown up and is able to express himself in literary language, he is freed
from these wholesome restraints. He may indulge in peevishness to his heart's content, and
it will be received as a sort of esoteric wisdom. For we are simple-minded creatures, and prone
to superstition. It is only a few thousand years since the alphabet was invented, and the printing-press
is still more recent. There is still a certain Delphic mystery about the printed page which
imposes upon the imagination. When we sit down with a book, it is hard to realize that we are
only conversing with a fellow being who may know little more about the subject in hand than
we do, and who is attempting to convey to us not only his life-philosophy, but also his aches
and pains, his likes and dislikes, and the limitations of his own experience. When doleful
sounds come from the oracle, we take it for granted that something is the matter with the universe,
when all that has happened is that one estimable gentleman, on a particular morning, was out
of sorts when he took pen in hand.

At Christmas time, when we naturally want to be on good terms with our fellow men, and when
our pursuit of happiness takes the unexpectedly genial form of plotting for their happiness,
the disposition of our favorite writers becomes a matter of great importance to us. A surly,
sour-tempered person, taking advantage of our confidence, can turn us against our best friends.
If he has an acrid wit he may make us ashamed of our highest enthusiasms. He may so picture
human life as to make the message "Peace on earth, good will to men" seem a mere mockery.

I have a friend who has in him the making of a popular scientist, having an easy flow of extemporaneous
theory, so that he is never closely confined to his facts. One of his theories is that pessimism
is purely a literary disease, and that it can only be conveyed through the printed page. In
having a single means of infection it follows the analogy of malaria, which in many respects
it resembles. No mosquito, no malaria; so no book, no pessimism. Of course you must have a
particular kind of mosquito, and he must have got the infection somewhere; but that is his
concern, not yours. The important thing for you is that he is the middleman on whom you depend
for the disease. In like manner, so my friend asserts, the writer is the middleman through
whom the public gets its supply of pessimism.

I am not prepared to give an unqualified assent to this theory, for I have known some people
who were quite illiterate who held very gloomy views. At the same time it seems to me there
is something in it.

When an unbookish individual is in the dumps, he is conscious of his own misery, but he does
not attribute it to all the world. The evil is narrowly localized. He sees the dark side of
things because he is so unluckily placed that that alone is visible, but he is quite ready
to believe that there is a bright side somewhere.

I remember several pleasant half-hours spent in front of a cabin on the top of a far western
mountain. The proprietor of the cabin, who was known as "Pat," had dwelt there in solitary
happiness until an intruder came and settled near by. There was incompatibility of temper,
and a feud began. Henceforth Pat had a grievance, and when a sympathetic traveler passed by,
he would pour out the story of his woes; for like the wretched man of old he meditated evil
on his bed against his enemy. And yet, as I have said, the half-hours spent in listening to
these tirades were not cheerless, and no bad effects followed. Pat never impressed me as being
inclined to misanthropy; in fact, I think he might have been set down as one who loved his
fellow men, always excepting the unlucky individual who lived next to him. He never imputed
the sins of this particular person to Humanity. There was always a sunny margin of good humor
around the black object of his hate. In this respect Pat was angry and sinned not. After listening
to his vituperative eloquence I would ride on in a hopeful frame of mind. I had seen the worst
and was prepared for something better. It was too bad that Pat and his neighbor did not get
on better together. But this was an incident which did not shut out the fact that it was a
fine day, and that some uncommonly nice people might live on the other side of the range.

But if Pat had possessed a high degree of literary talent, and had written a book, I am sure
the impression would have been quite different. Two loveless souls, living on top of a lonely
mountain, with the pitiless stars shining down on their futile hate! What theme could be more
dreary. After reading the first chapter I should be miserable.

"This," I should murmur, "is Life. There are two symbolic figures,--Pat and the Other. The
artist, with relentless sincerity, refuses to allow our attention to be distracted by the introduction
of any characters unconnected with the sordid tragedy. Here is human nature stripped of all
its pleasant illusions. What a poor creature is man!"

Pat and his neighbor, having become characters in a book, are taken as symbols of humanity,
just as the scholastic theologians argued in many learned volumes, that Adam and Eve, being
all that there were at the time, should be treated as "all mankind," at least for purposes
of reprobation.

The author who is saddest when he writes takes us at a disadvantage. He may assert that he
is only telling us the truth. If it is ugly, that is not his fault. He pictures to us the thing
he sees, and declares that if we could free ourselves from our sentimental preference for what
is pleasing we should praise him for his fidelity.

In all this the author is well within his rights. But if he prefers unmitigated gloom in his
representations of life, we on our part have the right of not taking him too seriously. Speaking
of disillusion, two can play at that game. We must get over our too romantic attitude toward
literature. We must not exaggerate the significance of what is presented to us, and treat that
which is of necessity partial as if it were universal. When we are presented with a poor and
shabby world, peopled only with sordid self-seekers, we need not be unduly depressed. We take
the thing for what it is, a fragment. We are not looking directly at the world, but only at
so much of it as has been mirrored in one particular mind. The mirror is not very large, and
there is an obvious flaw in it which more or less distorts the image. Still let us be thankful
for what is set before us, and make allowance for the natural human limitations. In this way
one can read almost any sincere book, not only with profit, but with a certain degree of pleasure.

Let us remember that only a very small amount of good literature falls within Shelley's definition
of poetry as "the record of the best and happiest moments of the happiest and best minds."
For these rare outpourings of joyous, healthy life we are duly thankful. They are to be received
as gifts of the gods, but we must not expect too many of them. Even the best minds often leave
no record of their happiest moments, while they become garrulous over what displeases them.
The cave of Adullam has always been the most prolific literary centre. Every man who has a
grievance is fiercely impelled to self-expression. He is not content till his grievance is
published to the unheeding world. And it is well that it is so. We should be in a bad way if
it were not for these inspired Adullamites who prevent us from resting in slothful indifference
to evil.

Most writers of decided individuality are incited by a more or less iconoclastic impulse. There
is an idol they want to smash, a conventional lie which they want to expose. It is the same
impulse which moves almost every right-minded citizen, once or twice in his life, to write
a letter of protest to the newspaper. Things are going wrong in his neighborhood, and he is
impatient to set them right.

There are enough real grievances, and the full expression of them is a public service. But
the trouble is that any one who develops a decided gift in that direction is in danger of becoming
the victim of his own talent. Eloquent fault-finding becomes a mannerism. The original grievance
loses its sharp outlines; it, as it were, passes from the solid to the gaseous state. It becomes
vast, pervasive, atmospheric. It is like the London fog, enveloping all objects, and causing
the eyes of those who peer through it to smart.

This happened, in the last generation, to Carlyle and Ruskin, and in a certain degree to Matthew
Arnold. Each had his group of enthusiastic disciples who responded eagerly to their master's
call. They renounced shams or machine-made articles or middle-class Philistinism as the case
might be. They went in for sincerity, or Turner, or "sweetness and light," with all the ardor
of youthful neophytes. And it was good for them. But after a while they became, if not exactly
weary in well-doing, at least a little weary of the unintermittent tirades against ill-doing.
They were in the plight of the good Christian who goes to church every Sunday only to hear
the parson rebuke the sins of the people who are not there. The man who dated his moral awakening
from "Sartor Resartus" began to find the "Latter Day Pamphlets" wear on his nerves. It is good
to be awakened; but one does not care to have the rising bell rung in his ears all day long.
One must have a little ease, even in Zion.

Ruskin had a real grievance, and so had Matthew Arnold. It is too bad that so much modern work
is poorly done; and it is too bad that the middle-class Englishman has a number of limitations
that are quite obvious to his candid friends,--and that his American cousin is no better. Nature
has its charms every hour different, because each has its mysteries of life and love, by the way
in patting the divine magician called Light. Thus, we avidity we admire so much in recent afternoon
as the first of morning. If the next day we had seen, by a singular fortune, the three major
phenomena Optical and weather that is usually supplied to the Rigi, in the afternoon, it was clear
but full of poetic melancholy, we saw the immense panorama under the peaceful aspect.

From the high vantage point of Kulm we registered, to the naked eye or through a huge telescope almost
the whole of the east-central Switzerland and a vast region in the south, in direction more
colossal chains to the Alps. We were in sight, in whole or in part, the plains valleys and high reliefs
of thirteen or fourteen cantons of the Confederation under to the great basin of the Rhine and its
tributaries, and saw below, and to our feet as depths opal and pale blue, and he more or less
considerable distances and with the most diverse forms, twelve major lakes: the Four-cantons, at
parties, Sempach, Baldeg and Hallwyl, to the west, the Zug, district in Zurich, Greiffertz, Egeria
and Pfoeffikon, to the north, and those of Lowerz and Wallenstatter (Between Glarus and St. Gallen)
to N.-E. With the telescope we could see distinctly all households, and even small objects
from Lucerne, Art, Zug, district in Zurich and many other localities, and in the circle a hundred leagues
to cover, we were perplexed to choose the most beautiful among so many beauties. To the north
the sight is lost in the direction of the Rhine, stopping in distant chain of the Forest-Black,
which forms the mountains of the Grand Duchy of Baden and a part the kingdom of Württemberg.
South side of Nidwalden, is also the lake of Sarnen, and the look is confronted with severe
mole Pilate and the magnificent peaks of the Alps. Al west lie the smiling plains of the canton
of Lucerne and the basins of the Reuss and the Aar, whose ripples will give the appearance
of a sea of ​​pale or yellow vegetables. For Finally, the east is developed tumultuous chaos
of the Alps of Glarus, and Appenzel Graubünden, towering towards the S.-E. the most gigantic
refrigerators. That is huge in proportions and prodigiously beautiful!

       * * * * *

It was four o'clock when the bagpipes are keen alpine woke us up and put Moving them all. We
went to watch the sunrise, which is one of the most sublime shows that can be seen from a
high summit of the Alps. Our fortune was such that not only had that pleasure for several minutes,
but we see the spectrum solar in all its frightening majesty, and the sudden formation of a
lake storm Lucerne. The dawn was just beginning when more than three hundred people we were at
the point peak, watching the moment when the sun was rising over the Alps.

All the immense panorama in the afternoon before we had seen was in darkness, but not in deep
darkness, but covered with crape vague dark gray ink, something lighter on the spaces of the
lakes, whose breasts were lifted mists and vapors fixed it seems, at first, and then wandering
and dispersed. The stars were still a glow pale and dying, and dead silence reigned in the bottom
of all deep. A lamp of light appeared in the east like a speck of white undecided, then spread
at the foot of the horizon in a huge pink ribbon and light, and the stars dimmed his trembling
brilliance. A few minutes they stopped and the clear and pure light appeared on the heights from
heaven, saw that began to shine the leadership of the highest and distant peaks, whilst that the great
mass of the landscape was covered with deep shadows. Then the huge amphitheater Alpine was offering
a succession of occurrences: the light falling on the alti-plains and valleys in countless waterfalls,
collapsed suddenly, from moment to moment, of a great top to lowest rung of another, this
to a lower, and so on to flood the entire grandstand clearly titanic mountain ranges.

Then a light closer, like the glow of a fire invisible, appeared on the first summit of the east,
above the Rigi, a minute later appeared the edge of the solar disk then a fourth, half, finally
all astro sovereign physical creation, huge, red as the gaping mouth of a furnace full of fire,
and as close to under the optical illusion, it seemed as attached to the back of the mountain
and threatening to come upon us. All time was flooded with light that sea of ​​blue ocean flowed,
all depths were clarified, reverberated lakes like mirrors, and a shout in unison chord and three
hundred throats greeted the appearance of universal lover!
 Her father allowed her
to indulge her fancy, "never considering their dangerous tendency to a young, inexperienced
female mind." The various calamities into which Miss Dorcasina Sheldon fell may be imagined
by those who have not the patience to search for them upon the printed pages. Her parting words
to those who had the guardianship of female minds had great solemnity. "Withhold from their
eyes the pernicious volumes, which while they convey false ideas of life, and inspire illusory
expectations, will tend to keep them ignorant of everything worth knowing; and which if they
do not eventually render them miserable may at least prevent them from becoming respectable.
Suffer not their imaginations to be filled with ideas of happiness, particularly in the connubial
state, which can never be realized."

If Mrs. Tabitha Tenney were to come to life in our day I think she would hardly feel like warning
the Columbian young ladies against the effect of works of fiction in exaggerating the happiness
of life in general or of the connubial state in particular. The young ladies are much more
in danger of having their spirits depressed by the painstaking representation of miseries they
are never likely to experience. The gloomy views of average human nature which once were conscientiously
expounded by "painful preachers" are now taken up by painful play-wrights and story-tellers.
Under the spell of powerful imaginations it is quite possible to see this world as nothing
but a vale of tears.

Happily there is always a way of escape for those who are quick-witted enough to think of it
in time. When fiction offers us only arid actualities, we can flee from it into the romance
of real life.

I sympathize with a young philosopher of my acquaintance. He took great joy in a Jack-o-lantern.
The ruddy countenance of the pumpkin was the very picture of geniality. Good-will gleamed from
the round eyes, and the mouth was one luminous smile. No wonder that he asked the privilege
of taking it to bed with him. He shouted gleefully when it was left on the table.

But when he was alone Mr. Jack-o-lantern assumed a more grimly realistic aspect. There was
something sinister in the squint of his eye, and uncanny in the way his rubicund nose gleamed.
On entering the room a little while after I found it in darkness.

"What has become of your Jack-o-lantern?"

"He was making faces at me. I looked at him till I 'most got scared, so I just got up and blew
him out."

I commended my philosopher for his good sense. It is the way to do with Jack-o-lanterns when
they become unmannerly.

And I believe that it is the best way to treat distressing works of the imagination, though
I know that their authors, who take themselves solemnly, will resent this advice.

We can't blow out a reality, just because it happens to make us miserable. We must face it.
It is a part of the discipline of life. But a book or a play has no such right to domineer
over us. Our own imagination has the first rights in its own home. If some other person's imagination
intrudes and "makes faces," it is our privilege to blow it out.

IV

The Ignominy of Being Grown-up

As I have already intimated, my greatest intellectual privilege is my acquaintance with a philosopher.
He is not one of those unsocial philosophers who put their best thoughts into books to be kept
in cold storage for posterity. My Philosopher is eminently social, and is conversational in
his method. He belongs to the ancient school of the Peripatetics, and the more rapidly he is
moving the more satisfactory is the flow of his ideas.

He is a great believer in the Socratic method. He feels that a question is its own excuse for
being. The proper answer to a question is not a stupid affirmation that would close the conversation,
but another question. The questions follow one another with extreme rapidity. He acts upon
my mind like an air pump. His questions speedily exhaust my small stock of acquired information.
Into the mental vacuum thus produced rush all sorts of irrelevant ideas, which we proceed to
share. In this way there comes a sense of intellectual comradeship which one does not have
with most philosophers.

For four years my Philosopher has been interrogating Nature, and he has not begun to exhaust
the subject. Though he has accumulated a good deal of experience, he is still in his intellectual
prime. He has not yet reached the "school age," which in most persons marks the beginning of
the senile decay of the poetic imagination.

In my walks and talks with my Philosopher I have often been amazed at my own limitations. Things
which are so easy for him are so difficult for me. Particularly is this the case in regard
to the more fundamental principles of philosophy. All philosophy, as we know, is the search
for the Good, the True, and the Beautiful. These words represent only the primary colors of
the moral spectrum. Each one is broken up into any number of secondary colors. Thus the Good
ranges all the way from the good to eat to the good to sacrifice one's self for; the Beautiful
ascends from the most trifling prettiness to the height of the spiritually sublime; while the
True takes in all manner of verities, great and small. In comparing notes with my Philosopher
I am chagrined at my own color-blindness. He recognizes so many superlative excellences to
which I am stupidly oblivious.

In one of our walks we stop at the grocer's, I having been asked to fill the office of domestic
purveyor. It is a case where the office has sought the man, and not the man the office. Lest
we forget, everything has been written down so that a wayfaring man, though a fool, need not
err therein,--baking-powder and coffee and a dozen eggs, and last and least, and under no circumstances
to be forgotten, a cake of condensed yeast. These things weigh upon my spirits. The thought
of that little yeastcake shuts out any disinterested view of the store. It is nothing to me
but a prosaic collection of the necessaries of life. I am uncheered by any sense of romantic
adventure.

Not so with my Philosopher. He is in the rosy dawn of expectation. The doors are opened, and
he enters into an enchanted country. His eyes grow large as he looks about him. He sees visions
of the Good, the True, and the Beautiful in all their bewildering, concrete variety. They are
in barrels and boxes and paper bundles. They rise toward the sky in shelves that reach at last
the height of the gloriously unattainable. He walks through the vales of Arcady, among pickles
and cheeses. He lifts up his eyes wonderingly to snowy Olympus crowned with Pillsbury's Best.
He discovers a magic fountain, not spurting up as if it were but for a moment, but issuing
forth with the mysterious slowness that befits the liquefactions of the earlier world. "What
is that?" he asks, and I can hardly frame the prosaic word "Molasses."

"Molasses!" he cries, gurgling with content; "what a pretty word!" I hadn't thought about it,
but it is a pretty word, and it has come straight down from the Greek word for honey.

He discovers works of art. Surprising pictures, glowing in color, are on the walls. These are
cherubs rioting in health, smiling old men, benignant matrons, radiant maidens, all feasting
on nectar and ambrosia. Here and there is a pale ascetic, with a look of agony on his emaciated
face.

"What makes that man feel so bad?" asks my Philosopher, anxious to extract a story from the
picture. In the democratic cantons Catholicism
has been democratic, harmless, aligning their interests with those of society. In district in Zurich,
Protestantism has maintained the notion of personal freedom, opening the way the republic, but
has not gone directly to pure democracy, because the habits Protestant individualism becomes
a believer, not amalgamated but after much time (or in exceptional circumstances, as in the U.S.)
with the habits of action engendering collective Catholicism.
 There is a difference in the horizon line,
and the realm of mystery begins much nearer. There is no disenchanting bird's-eye view of the
counter with all things thereon. There are alluring glimpses of piled-up wealth.

There particularly is the land of the heart's desire in a square glass-covered case. There
are many beautiful things in the store to be admired from below; but one supremely beautiful
and delectable object is the crowning glory of the place.

The artist who spends his life in attempting to minister to dull adult sensibilities never
created a masterpiece that gave such pure delight as the candy dog which my Philosopher spies.

"See the dog!" It is, indeed, a miracle of impressionist art. It is not like the dogs that
bite. It offers itself alluringly to the biter,--or rather to one who would leisurely absorb
it. Even now there is a vagueness of outline that suggests the still vaguer outlines it will
have when it comes into the possession of a person of taste.

This treasure can be procured for one copper cent. My Philosopher feels that it is a wise investment,
and I thoroughly agree with him. However much the necessaries of life may have advanced in
price, the prime luxuries are still within the reach of all. We still have much to be thankful
for when with one cent we can purchase a perfect bliss.

It is all so interesting and satisfactory that we feel that the visit to the grocer's has been
a great success. It is only when we are halfway home that we remember the yeastcake.

Sometimes my Philosopher insists upon my telling him a story. Then I am conscious of my awkwardness.
It is as if my imagination were an old work-horse suddenly released from its accustomed tip-cart
and handed over to a gay young knight who is setting forth in quest of dragons. It is blind
of both eyes, and cannot see a dragon any more, and only shies, now and then, when it comes
to a place where it saw one long ago. There is an element of insincerity in these occasional
frights which does not escape the clear-eyed critic. It gets scared at the wrong times, and
forgets to prance when prancing is absolutely demanded by the situation.

When my Philosopher tells a story, it is all that a story ought to be. There is no labored
introduction, no tiresome analysis. It is pure story, "of imagination all compact." Things
happen with no long waits between the scenes. Everything is instantly moulded to the heart's
desire.

"Once upon a time there was a little boy. And he wanted to be a cock-a-doodle-doo.

Physiologists tell us that the trouble with advancing years is that the material which in youth
went directly to building up the vital organs is diverted to the connective tissue, so that
after a time there gets to be too much connective tissue and too little to connect. When the
imagination is in its first freshness, a story is almost without connective tissue. There seems
hardly enough to hold it together. There is nothing to take our minds off the successive happenings.
If it is deemed desirable that a little boy should be a cock-a-doodle-doo, then he is a cock-a-doodle-doo.
All else is labor and sorrow.

As a listener my Philosopher is no less successful than as an improviser. He is not one of
those fickle hearers whose demands for some new thing are the ruination of literary art. When
he finds something beautiful it is a joy to him forever, and its loveliness increases with
each repetition. In a classic tale he is quick to resent the slightest change in phraseology.
There is a just severity in his rebuke when, in order to give a touch of novelty, I mix up
the actions appropriate to the big bear, the little bear, and the middle-sized bear. This clumsy
attempt at originality by means of a willful perversion of the truth offends him. If a person
can't be original without making a mess of it, why try to be original at all?

With what keen expectancy he awaits each inevitable word, and how pleased he is to find that
everything comes out as he expected! He reserves his full emotion for the true dramatic climax.
If a great tragedian could be assured of having such an appreciative audience, how pleasant
would be the pathway of art! The tragedy of Cock Robin reaches its hundredth night with no
apparent falling off in interest. It is followed as only the finest critic will listen to the
greatest actor of an immortal drama. He is perfectly familiar with the text, and knows where
the thrills come in. When the fatal arrow pierces Cock Robin's breast, it never fails to bring
an appreciative exclamation, "He's killed Cock Robin!"

Of the niceties of science my Philosopher takes little account, yet he loves to frequent the
Museum of Natural History, and is on terms of intimacy with many of the stuffed animals. He
walks as a small Adam in this Paradise, giving to each creature its name. His taste is catholic,
and while he delights in the humming birds, he does not therefore scorn the less brilliant
hippopotamus. He has no repugnance to an ugliness that is only skin deep. He reserves his disapprobation
for an ugliness that seems to be a visible sign of inner ungraciousness. The small monkeys
he finds amusing; but he grows grave as he passes on to the larger apes, and begins to detect
in them a caricature of their betters. When we reach the orang-outang he says, "Now let's go
home." Once outside the building, he remarks, "I don't like mans when they're not made nice."
I agree with him; for I myself am something of a misanthropoidist.

There is nothing unusual about my Philosopher. He is not a prodigy or a genius. He is what
a normal human being is at the age of four, when he is still in possession of all his faculties.
Having eyes he sees with them, and having ears he hears with them. Having a little mind of
his own, he uses it on whatever comes to hand, trying its edge on everything, just as he would
try a jackknife if I would let him. He wants to cut into things and see what they are made
of. He wants to try experiments. He doesn't care how they come out; he knows they will come
out some way or other. Having an imagination, he imagines things, and his imagination being
healthy, the things he imagines are very pleasant. In this way he comes to have a very good
time with his own mind. Moreover, he is a very little person in a very big world, and he is
wise enough to know it. So instead of confining himself to the things he understands, which
would not be enough to nourish his life, he manages to get a good deal of pleasure out of the
things he does not understand, and so he has "an endless fountain of immortal drink."

What becomes of these imaginative, inquisitive, myth-making, light-hearted, tender-hearted,
and altogether charming young adventurers who start out so gayly to explore the wonder-world?

The solemn answer comes, "They after a while are grown-up." Did you ever meditate on that catastrophe
which we speak of as being "grown-up"? Habit has dulled our perception of the absurd anti-climax
involved in it. You have only to compare the two estates to see that something has been lost.

You linger for a moment when the primary school has been dismissed. For a little while the
stream of youthful humanity flows sluggishly as between the banks of a canal, but once beyond
the school limits it returns to nature. It is a bright, foaming torrent. Not a moment is wasted.
The little girls are at once exchanging confidences, and the little boys are in Valhalla, where
the heroes make friends with one another by indulging in everlasting assault and battery, and
continually arise "refreshed with blows." There is no question about their being all alive
and actively interested in one another. All the natural reactions are exhibited in the most
interesting manner.

Then you get into a street car, invented by an ingenious misanthropist to give you the most
unfavorable view possible of your kind. On entering you choose a side, unless you are condemned
to be suspended in the middle. Then you look at your antagonists on the opposite side. What
a long, unrelenting row of humanity! These are the grown-ups. You look for some play of emotion,
some evidence of curiosity, pleasure, exhilaration, such as you might naturally expect from
those who are taking a little journey in the world.

Not a sign of any such emotion do you discern. They are not adventuring into a wonder-world.
They are only getting over the ground. One feels like putting up a notice: "Lost, somewhere
on the road between infancy and middle age, several valuable faculties. The finder will find
something to his advantage."

I have no quarrel with Old Age. It should be looked upon as a reward of merit to be cheerfully
striven for.

     Old Age hath still his honor and his toil.

Nor do I object to the process of growth. It belongs to the order of nature. Growing is like
falling,--it is all right so long as you keep on; the trouble comes when you stop.

What I object to is the fatalistic way in which people acquiesce in the arrest of their own
mental development. Adolescence is exciting. All sorts of things are happening, and more are
promised. Life rushes on with a sweet tumult. All things seem possible. It seems as if a lot
of the unfinished business of the world is about to be put through with enthusiasm. Then, just
as the process has had a fair start, some evil spirit intervenes and says: "Time's up! You've
grown all you are to be allowed to. Now you must settle down,--and be quick about it! No more
adolescing; you are adults!"

Poor adults! Nature seems to have been like an Indian giver, taking away the gifts as soon
as they are received,--

                          The gifts of morn
     Ere life grows noisy and slower-footed thought
     Can overtake the rapture of the sense.

The extinction of the early poetry and romance which gave beauty to the first view of these
realities has often been accomplished by the most deliberate educational processes. There are
two kinds of education,--that which educates, and that which eradicates. The latter is the
easier and the more ancient method.

But with this broad-sowing of the highest gifts it is astonishing how few come to maturity.
I imagine that the Educational Man with the Hoe is responsible for a good deal of the loss.
In his desire for clean culture he treats any sproutings of the faculty divine as mere weeds,
if they come up between the rows.

If the Educational Man with the Hoe is to be feared, the Educational Man with the Pruning Shears
is an equal menace.

There is an art, once highly esteemed, called topiary. The object of topiary when carried to
excess was to take a tree, preferably a yew tree, and by careful trimming to make it look like
something else, say a peacock standing under an umbrella. Curious effects could be produced
in this way, leafy similitudes of birds and animals could be made so that the resemblance was
almost as striking as if they had been cut out of gingerbread.

The object of educational topiary is to take a child, and, by careful pruning away of all his
natural propensities, make of him a miniature grown-up. It is an interesting art, for it shows
what can be done; the only wonder is why any one should want to do it. If you would see this
art at its best, turn to Miss Edgeworth's "Frank," a book much admired in its day. Frank, to
begin with, was a very likable little boy. If he was not made of the "sugar and spice and all
things nice" that little girls are made of, he had all the more homely miscellaneous ingredients
that little boys are made of. The problem of the careful father and mother was to take Frank
and reduce him in the shortest possible time to the adult frame of mind. To this end they sought
out any vagrant fancies and inquisitive yearnings and wayward adventurousness, and destroyed
them. This slaughter of the innocents continued till Frank's mind was a model of propriety.

It was hard work, but there was a satisfaction in doing it thoroughly. The evening meal was
transformed into a purgatorial discipline, and as he progressed from course to course Frank's
mind was purified as by fire.

Here is one occasion. There was a small plumcake, and Frank was required to divide it so that
each of the five persons present should have a just share. Frank began to cut the cake, but
by a mistake cut it into six pieces instead of five.

This miscarriage of justice sent dismay into the hearts of his parents. They felt that he was
at the parting of the ways. It was a great moral crisis, in which his character was to be revealed.
What would Frank do with that sixth piece of cake? Perhaps--horrible thought!--he might eat
it. From this crime he was saved only to fall into the almost equal sin of unscientific charity.
In order to save trouble he proposed to give the extra piece to his father, and when questioned
he could give no better reason than that he thought his father liked cake.

"'What right have you to give it to any of us? You were to judge about the size of the pieces,
and you were to take care that we each have our just share. But you are going to give one of
us twice as much as any of the others.'"

Justice triumphed. "Frank took the trouble to think, and he then cut the spare bit of cake
into five equal parts, and he put these parts by the side of the five large pieces and gave
one of the large and one of the small pieces to each person, and he then said: 'I believe I
have divided the cake fairly now.' Everybody present said 'yes,' and everybody looked carefully
at each of the shares, and there appeared exactly the same quantity in each share. So each
person took a share, and all were satisfied."

That is to say, all were satisfied except Frank's mother. She was afraid that the family meal
had not yielded its full educational value.

"'My dear Frank,' said his mother, 'as you have divided the cake so fairly, let us see how
you will divide the sugar that was upon the top of the cake, and which is now broken and crumbled
to pieces in the plate. 

At the point that the vast bulk of the Rigi has its eastern flank, facing Rossberg, which stands opposite
an emaciated monster, the valley has a look of desolation to grieve, especially for the memories
awakened by huge naked pedrizcos scattered at the site in 1806 occupied the town or village
of Goldau. Today there are no but a chapel, a hotel for travelers and forming a street a few
houses built in recent times. As we prepare the horses that we ride to raise the Rigi, we wanted
to go on foot, between rough weeds, rocks shattered and disordered overcrowding the remains of
the terrible crash, the scene of desolation that witnessed the disaster. Still found some burned bed
ponds, remnants of the waters of Lake Lowerz, coming up there and that was violently filled
in part by the sudden fall of a quadroon the Rossberg.

Upstairs has the ugly face of the mountain, whose side came off in
a thousand large moles of rocks and dust, falling over the valley
and crushing and grinding the old town Goldau.

The huge red patch that was on the mountain gives you a look of death and horror to tremble, because
the traveler remembers that many Swiss people living under such constant threat of landslides.
The desolation of Goldau and flank of the mountain makes the most rude contrast to the beautiful
panorama of the valley and the rest of the valley, from the Zug Lake to the banks of Muottas.

It
was three o'clock when we began to ascend the Rigi, in convoy with another ten or twelve hikers.
The mountain was displayed to our eyes full of beauty and majesty in Joint and surprises in
their thanks and relief, his deep gullies, its magnificent forests,
the lonely prairies, their scattered houses and its thousands of interesting
features.

Suddenly, when the sun was more sharp and stronger heat, in spite of the high peaks towards ascension,
brought us air bursts threatening blight the sky, and everything changed in appearance with
how quickly a theater decoration is changed. The storm broke out with violence, Fortunately when
we got to stop a house, but after twenty minutes dissipated with the same swiftness. So are the
storms in almost all lakes and mountain regions Switzerland.

I confess that the accident, far from disappointed, gave us keen pleasure, and because it gave
us chance to see one of those violent weather and interesting transitions Switzerland and because
it presented a spectacle of immeasurable beauty, who had never contemplated under similar conditions
and that can only be found in narrow valleys formed by high mountains
and lakes in the background.

By the time the rain fell with more violence and abundance on the height where we were, the valley
was a wonderful theater lighting scene, color shades and superb contrast.


"'Everything,' said his father, 'to the one object of making an orrery,--and when made as well
as you possibly could with my assistance make it, observe that it will only be what others
have repeatedly made before.... Master Frank will grow older, and when or why or how he made
this orrery few will know or care, but all will see whether he has the knowledge which is necessary
for a man and a gentleman to possess. Now choose, Frank.'"

Frank seized the orrery. "'Mary, bring your work basket, my dear,' said he.

"And he pulled off one by one, deliberately, the worsted sun, moon, earth, and stars, and threw
them into the work basket which Mary held. Mary sighed, but Frank did not sigh. He was proud
to give his father a proof of his resolution, and when he looked around he saw tears, but they
were tears of pleasure, in his mother's eyes.

"'Are you sure yet that I can keep to my good resolution?'

"'I am not quite sure, but this is a good beginning,' said his father."

The aim of all this discipline was to make Frank just like his father. Now I am not saying
anything against Frank's father. He was a truly good man, and well-to-do. Still, there have
always been so many just like him that it would not have done much harm if Frank had been allowed
to be a little different.

I cannot help thinking how different was a contemporary of his, Michael Faraday. Faraday had
not any one to look after him in his youth, and to keep him from making unnecessary experiments.
When he felt like making an experiment he did so. There was no one to tell him how it would
come out, so he had to wait to see how it did come out. In this way he wasted a good deal of
time that might have been spent in learning the things that every educated Englishman was expected
to know, and he found out a good many things that the educated Englishman did not know,--this
caused him to be always a little out of the fashion.

He let curiosity get the better of him, and when he was quite well on in years he would try
to do things with pith-balls and electric currents, just as Frank tried to do things with worsted
balls before his father showed him the folly of it. Some of his experiments turned out to be
very useful, but most of them did not. Some of them only proved that what people thought they
knew was not so. Faraday seemed to be just as much interested in this kind as in the other.
He never learned to mind only his own business, but was always childishly inquisitive, so he
never was so sure of things as was Frank's father.

Still, it takes all sorts of people to make up a world, and if a person cannot be like Frank's
father, it is not so bad to be like Faraday.

Frank's father would have been shocked at Faraday's first introduction to the problems of metaphysical
speculation. "I remember," he says, "being a great questioner when young." And one of his first
questions was in regard to the seat of the soul. The question was suggested in this way. Being
a small boy, and seeing the bars of an iron railing, he felt called upon to try experimentally
whether he could squeeze through. The experiment was only a partial success. He got his head
through, but he could not get it back. Then the physical difficulty suggested the great metaphysical
question, "On which side of the fence am I?"

Frank's father would have said that that was neither the time nor the place for such speculation,
and that the proper way to study philosophy was to wait till one could sit down in a chair
and read it out of a book. But to Faraday the thoughts he got out of a book never seemed to
be so interesting as those which came to him while he was stuck in the fence.

When Frank learned a few lines of poetry, he asked to be allowed to say them to his father.

"'I think,' said his mother, 'your father would like you to repeat them if you understand them
all, but not otherwise.'"

Of course that was the end of any nonsense in that direction. If Frank was kept away from any
poetry he could not altogether understand, he would soon be grown-up, so that he would not
be tempted by any kind of poetry any more than his father was.

I am sure Frank's father would have disapproved of the way my Philosopher takes his poetry.
His favorite poem is "A frog he would a-wooing go,"--especially the first quatrain. His analysis
is very defective; he takes it as a whole. He likes the mystery of it, the quick action, the
hearty, inconsequent refrain:--

     A frog he would a-wooing go--
           Heigh ho! says Rowley--
     Whether his mother would let him or no--
     With a rowly-powly, gammon and spinach.
           Heigh ho! says Anthony Rowley.

This to him is poetry. Everything is lifted above the commonplace. The frog is no cousin to
the vulgar hop-toad, whose presence in the garden, in spite of his usefulness, is an affront.
He is a creature of romance; he is going a-wooing,--whatever that may be;--he only knows that
it is something dangerous. And what a glorious line that is,--

     Whether his mother would let him or no.

It thrills him like the sound of a trumpet. And great, glorious Anthony Rowley! It needs no
footnote to tell about him. It is enough to know that Rowley is a great, jovial soul, who,
when the poetry is going to his liking, cries, "Heigh ho!"--and when Rowley cries, "Heigh ho!"
my Philosopher cries, "Heigh ho!" too, just to keep him company. And so the poem goes on "with
a rowly-powly, gammon and spinach," and nobody knows what it means. That's the secret.

Now I should not wish my Philosopher always to look upon "A frog he would a-wooing go" as the
high-water mark of poetical genius; but I should wish him to bring to better poetry the same
hearty relish he brings to this. The rule should be,--

     Now good digestion wait on appetite,
     And health on both.

When I see persons who upon the altar of education have sacrificed digestion, appetite, and
health, I cannot but feel that something is wrong. I am reminded of an inscription which I
found on a tombstone in a Vermont churchyard:--

     Here lies cut down like unripe fruit
     The only son of Amos Toot.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Behold the amazing alteration
     Brought about by inoculation:
     The means employed his life to save
     Hurled him, untimely, to the grave.

Sometimes the good housewife has chosen carefully every ingredient for her cake, and has obeyed
conscientiously the mandates of the cookbook. She has with Pharisaic scrupulosity taken four
eggs and no more, and two cups of sugar, and two teaspoonfuls of sifted flour, and a pinch
of baking powder, and a small teacupful of hot water. She has beaten the eggs very light and
stirred in the flour only a little at a time. She has beaten the dough and added granulated
sugar with discretion. She has resisted the temptation to add more flour when she has been
assured that it would not be good for the cake. And then she has placed the work of her hands
in a moderately hot oven, after which she awaits the consummation of her hopes. In due time
she looks into the moderately hot oven, and finds only a sodden mass. Something has happened
to the cake.

Such accidents happen in the best of attempts at education. The outcome is disappointing. The
ingredients of the educational cake are excellent, and an immense amount of faithful work has
been put into it, but sometimes it does not rise. As the old-fashioned housekeeper would say,
it looks "sad."

It is easier to find fault with the result than to point out the remedy; but so long as such
results frequently happen, the business of the home and the school is full of fascinating and
disconcerting uncertainty. One thing is obvious, and that is that it is no more safe for the
teacher than for the preacher to "banish Nature from his plan." The first part, the closest to Schwyz,
lies at the bottom of the valley the small and very funny Lowerz lake, surrounded by inclines
and rolling hills. The lonely little lake, on whose banks turn two ways road, and whose clear waves
lie some little boats lost in the rush to edge of small harbors that are not without grace,
measures just 5 kilometers in length, as 2 and 1 / 2 wide and 18 meters deep.
 She is quite capable of taking
the finished product upon which we had prided ourselves and using it as the raw material out
of which to make something else. Of course this tries our temper. We do not like to see our
careful finishing touches treated in that way.

Especially does Nature upset our adult notions about the relations between teaching and learning.
We exalt the function of teaching, and seem to imagine that it might go on automatically. We
sometimes think of the teacher as a lawgiver, and of the learner as one who with docility receives
what is graciously given.

But the law to be understood and obeyed is the law of the learner's mind, and not that of the
teacher's. The didactic method must be subordinated to the vital. Teaching may be developed
into a very neat and orderly system, but learning is apt to be quite disorderly. It is likely
to come by fits and starts, and when it does come it is very exciting.

Those who have had the good fortune in mature life to learn something have described the experience
as being quite upsetting. They have found out something that they had never known before, and
the discovery was so overpowering that they could not pay attention to what other people were
telling them.

Kepler describes his sensations when he discovered the law of planetary motion. He could not
keep still. He forgot that he was a sober, middle-aged person, and acted as if he were a small
boy who had just got the answer to his sum in vulgar fractions. Nobody had helped him; he had
found it out for himself; and now he could go out and play. "Let nothing confine me: I will
indulge my sacred ecstasy. I will triumph over mankind.... If you forgive me, I rejoice; if
you are angry, I cannot help it." In fact, Kepler didn't care whether school kept or not.

Now in the first years of our existence we are in the way of making first-rate discoveries
every day. No wonder that we find it so hard to keep still and to listen respectfully to people
whose knowledge is merely reminiscent. Above all, it is difficult for us to keep our attention
fixed on their mental processes when our minds make forty revolutions to their one.

There, for instance, is the Alphabet. Because the teacher told us about it yesterday she is
grieved that we do not remember what she said. But so many surprising things have happened
since then that it takes a little time for us to make sure that it's the same old Alphabet
this morning that we had the other day. She is the victim of preconceived ideas on the subject,
but our minds are open to conviction. Most of the letters still look unfamiliar; but when we
really do learn to recognize Big A and Round O, we are disposed to indulge our sacred ecstasy
and to "triumph over mankind."

If the teacher be a sour person who has long ago completed her education, she will take this
occasion to chide us for not paying attention to a new letter that is just swimming into our
ken. If, however, she is fortunate enough to be one who keeps on learning, she will share the
triumph of our achievement, for she knows how it feels. A
cheery voice spoke with Mrs. Marques, and the gate of the ladder remained closed subtly.

- Who has just come out now, Mrs. Augusta? - Asked sweaty.

- Kidskin
going to the office ...

I returned to my room all lay quiet, identical
real.

The folio was still open Page fearful. I went back to read it, and now seemed old-fashioned prose
moralist tired every word had gone off like a coal.

I slept and dreamed that I was far beyond Beijing, on the borders of Tartary, in the kiosk a convent
of Lamas, maximum hearing wise and gentle aroma that flowed like a fine area, from the lips
of a living Buddha.

II

A month passed.

I, meanwhile, continued, daily routine and thought putting my beautiful cursive at government service,
and admiring, Sundays, the skill with which the splendid Dona Augusta Lieutenant cleaned Conceiro dandruff.
Thing was clear to me that night, asleep, reading about the folio, had dreamed of a "Temptation
on the Mount" in family forms. Instinctively, however, I was worrying about China. Telegrams read
newspapers always looking for things that referred to the Celestial
Empire, but nothing happened then in the region of the yellow races
... The "Agence Havas' only telegraphed on the Herzegovina, Bosnia,
Bulgaria and other curiosities the barbarian.

Little by little I forgot my spooky episode, and at the same time as gradually my spirit calmed,
he returned to the old ambitions who lived: an appointment Director General, within loving
Lola, bisteks more tender than those of Mrs. Augusta. But such gifts seemed so inaccessible, so beyond
reality, as themselves million in Mandarin.

And the dreary desert of life, was going beyond the slow caravan of my melancholy.

One Sunday in August, morning, dozing in bed, in shirt sleeves, with
cigar off between the lips when the door opened softly and half-opened
eyelids sleepy, bow saw a bald spot next to me respectfully.

And then a voice whispered disturbed:

- Mr. Theodore?

"Mr. Theodore, the Ministry of the Interior?

I got up slowly on my bed, and I said yawning:

- I, sir!

The man bent his back, as to the King Bobo bowing courtiers. It was small and fat: venerable gold
spectacles shone in his good-natured face, which seemed personification
of the Order.

All trembling, stammered embarrassed:

- I bring news to your honor! News of considerable importance. My name is Silvestre ... Juliano
and C. Silvestre th ... A servant helpful your excellency ... They
arrived in the mail Southampton ... We are Traigand Correspondents,
and C. First of Hong Kong.

Sofocóse bald man, flailing his big hands nervously in an envelope
filled with a wax seal, black, continued:

- Your Excellency must
be prevented.

We were not ... The embarrassment is natural ... What we hope is that we retain their confidence.
Your Excellency is in this land a flower of virtue, goodness mirror. Here are the first checks on
Bhering and Brothers of London ... Letters to thirty days on Rothschild.

At
this name, resonant as gold itself, I jumped out of bed quickly.

-
What is it, sir - I cried.

And he shouted again, waving the envelope,
flat on the tip of the boots, said:

- A hundred and twenty million
pesetas on London, Paris, Hamburg and Amsterdam, in letters for you!
To their credit, most excellent! For homes in Hong Kong, Shang-hai
and Guangzhou Mandarin legacy of Ti-Chin-Fu! The artist, the reformer, the inventor, the poet, the man of pure science, the
really fruitful and original man of affairs,--these are the incorrigibles. They refuse to accept
the hard-and-fast rules that are laid down for them. They insist upon finding time and room
for activities that are not conceived of as tasks, but as the glorious play of their own faculties.
They are full of a great, joyous impulse, and their work is but the expression of this impulse.
They somehow have time for the unexpected. They see that which

     Gives to seas and sunset skies
     The unspent beauty of surprise.

The world is in their eyes ever fresh and sparkling. Life is full of possibilities. They see
no reason to give up the habit of wonder. They never outgrow the need of asking questions,
though the final answers do not come.

When to a person of this temper you repeat the hard maxims of workaday wisdom, he escapes from
you with the smiling audacity of a truant boy. He is one who has awakened right early on a
wonderful morning. There is a spectacle to be seen by those who have eyes for it. He is not
willing out of respect for you to miss it. He hears the music, and he follows it. It is the
music of the

     Olympian bards who sung
       Divine ideas below,
     Which always find us young,
       And always keep us so.

V

Christmas and the Spirit of Democracy

"Times have changed," said old Scrooge, as he sat by my fireside on Christmas Eve. "The Christmas
Carol" had been read, as our custom was, and the children had gone to bed, so that only Scrooge
and I remained to watch the dying embers.

"Times have changed, and I am not appreciated as I was in the middle of the last century. People
don't seem to be having so good a time. You remember the Christmas when I was converted? What
larks! Up to that time I had been 'a squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous
old sinner.' Those were the very words that described me. Then the Christmas Spirit took possession
of me and--presto! change! All at once I became a new creature. I began to hurry about, giving
all sorts of things to all sorts of people. You remember how I scattered turkeys over the neighborhood,
shouting, 'Here's the turkey! Hello! Whoop! How are you! Merry Christmas!' And then I sat down
and chuckled over my generosity till I cried. I was having the time of my life. You see, I
hadn't been used to that sort of thing, and it went to my head.

"And how grateful everybody was! They took everything in the spirit in which it was offered,
and asked no questions. Everywhere there was an outstretched hand and a fervent God-bless-you
for every gift. Nobody twitted me about the past. I was all at once elevated to the position
of an earthly Providence.

"Talk of fun! Was there ever such a practical joke as to scare Bob Cratchit within an inch
of his life and then raise his salary before he could say Jack Robinson! You should have seen
him jump! How the little Cratchits shouted for joy! And when the thing was written up, all
Anglo-Saxondom was smiling through its tears and saying: 'That's just like us. God bless us,
every one.'

"But it's different now. Something has got into the Christmas Spirit. Doing good doesn't seem
such a jolly thing as it once was, and you can't carry it off with a whoop and hello. People
are getting critical. In these days a charitable shilling doesn't go so far as it used to,
and doesn't buy nearly so many God-bless-you's. You complain of the rise in the price of the
necessaries of life. It isn't a circumstance to the increase in the cost of luxuries like benevolence.
Almost every one looks forward to the time when he can afford to be generous. And when he is
generous he likes to feel generous, and to have other people sympathize with him. It's only
human nature. A man can't be thinking about himself all the time; he gets that tired feeling
that your scientific people in these days call altruism. It is an inability to concentrate
his mind on his own concerns. In spite of himself his thoughts wander off to other people's
affairs, and he has an impulse to do them good. Now in my day it was the easiest thing in the
world to do good. The only thing necessary was to feel good-natured, and there you were! Nowadays,
the way of the benefactor is hard. It's so difficult that I understand you actually have Schools
of Philanthropy."

Scrooge shrugged his shoulders and seemed to shrivel at the thought of these horrible institutions.

"Just fancy," he continued, "how I should have felt on that blessed Christmas night, if, instead
of starting off as an amateur angel, feeling my wings growing every moment, I had been compelled
to prepare for an entrance examination. I suppose I should have been put with the backward
pupils whose early education had been neglected, and should have had to learn the A B C's of
charity. School of Philanthropy! Ugh! And in the holidays, too!

"I have been visiting some elderly gentlemen who have had something of my experience with the
Spirit of Christmas. Like me, they were converted somewhat late in life. They never were in
as bad a way as I was, for I did business, you may remember, in a narrow street with quite
sordid surroundings, while they were financiers in a large way. Yet I suppose that they, too,
were 'squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous old sinners,' though nobody
had the courage to tell them so. Then they got tired of clutching, and their hearts warmed
and their hands relaxed and they began to give. Never was such giving known before. It was
a perfect deluge of beneficence. A mere catalogue of the gifts would make a Christmas carol
of itself.

"But would you believe it, they never have got the fun out of it that I got when I filled the
cab full of turkeys and set out for Camden town. The old Christmas feeling seems to have been
chilled. The public has grown critical. Instead of dancing for joy, it looks suspiciously at
the gifts and asks: 'Where did they get them?' It has been so impressed by the germ theory
of disease that it foolishly fears that even money may be tainted. It's a preposterous situation.
Generosity is a drug on the market, and gratitude can't be had at any reasonable price."

"Yes," I said, "you are quite right, public sentiment has changed. Gratitude is not so easily
won as it was in your day, and it takes longer to transform a clutching, covetous old sinner
into a serviceable philanthropist. But I do not think, Scrooge, that the Christmas Spirit has
really vanished. He is only a little chastened and subdued by the Spirit of Democracy."

"I don't see what Democracy has to do with it," said Scrooge. "I'm sure that nobody ever accused
me of being an aristocrat. What I am troubled about is the decay of gratitude. If I give a
poor fellow a shilling, I ought to be allowed the satisfaction of having him remove his hat
and say, 'Thank'ee, sir,' and he ought to say it as if he meant it. The heartiness of his thanksgiving
is half the fun. It makes one feel good all over."

"But," I answered, "if the fellow happens to have a good memory he may recall the fact that
yesterday you took two shillings from him, and he may think that the proper response to your
sudden act of generosity is, 'Where's that other shilling?' That's what the Spirit of Democracy
puts him up to. It's not so polite, but you must admit that it goes right to the point."

"I don't like it," said Scrooge.

"I thought you wouldn't. There are a great many people who don't like it. It's a twitting on
facts that takes away a good deal of the pleasure of being generous."

"I should say it did," grumbled Scrooge. "It makes you feel mean just when you are most sensitive.
Just think how I should have felt if, when I gave Bob Cratchit a dig in the waistcoat and told
him that I had raised his salary, he had taken the opportunity to ask for back pay. It would
have been most inopportune."

"You owed it to him, didn't you?"

"Yes, I suppose I did, if you choose to put it that way. But Bob wouldn't have put it that
way; he wouldn't take such liberties. He took what I gave him; and when I gave him more than
he expected, he was all the happier, and so was I. That's what made it all seem so nice and
Christmasy. We were not thinking about rights and duties; it was all free grace."

"Now, Scrooge, you are getting at the point. There is no concealing the fact that the Spirit
of Democracy makes himself unpleasant sometimes. He breaks up the old pleasant relations existing
not only between the Lords and the Commons, but between you and Bob Cratchit. Man is naturally
a superstitious creature, and is prone to worship the first thing that comes in his way. When
a poor fellow sees a person who is better off than himself, he jumps to the conclusion that
he is a better man, and bows down before him, as before a wonder-working Providence. When this
Providence smiles upon him, he is glad, and receives the bounty with devout thankfulness. It
is what the old theologians used to call 'an uncovenanted mercy.'

"All this is very pleasant to one who can sign himself by the grace of God king, or president
of a coal company, or some such thing as that. The gratification extends to all the minor grades
of greatness as well. The great man is ordained to give as it pleases him and the little men
to receive with due meekness. The great man is always the man who has something. I suppose,
Scrooge, that in your busy life, first scraping money together and then dispensing it in your
joyous Christmasy way, you have not had much time for general reading or even for listening
to sermons?"

"I have always attended Divine Service since my conversion," answered Scrooge, piously; "as
for listening--"

"What I was going to say was that if you had attended to such matters, you must have noticed
how much of the literature of good-will is devoted to the praise of the Blessed Inequalities.
How the changes are rung on the Strong and the Weak, the Wise and the Ignorant, the Rich and
the Poor; especially the Poor, who form the hub of the philanthropic universe. Nobody seems
to meet another on the level. Everybody is either looking up or looking down, and they are
taught how to do it. I remember attending the annual meeting of the Society for the Relief
of Indigent Children. The indigent children were first fed and then insulted by a plethoric
gentleman, who addressed to them a long discourse on indigence and the various duties that
it entailed. And no one of the children was allowed to throw things at the speaker. They had
all been taught to look grateful.

"Now these inequalities do exist, and so long as they exist all sorts of helpful offices have
place. The trouble is that good people are all the time doing their best to make the inequalities
permanent. You have heard how divines have interpreted the text, 'The poor ye have always with
you.' The good old doctrine has been that the relation between those who have not and those
who have should be that of one-sided dependence. The Ignorant must depend upon the Wise, the
Weak upon the Strong, the Poor upon the Rich. As for the black, yellow, and various parti-colored
races, they must depend upon the White Man, who gayly walks off with their burdens without
so much as saying 'By your leave.'

"Now it is against this whole theory, however beautifully or piously expressed, that the protest
has come. The Spirit of Democracy is a bold iconoclast, and goes about smashing our idols.
He laughs at the pretensions of the Strong and the Wise and the Rich to have created the things
they possess. They are not the masters of the feast. They are only those of us who have got
at the head of the line, sometimes by unmannerly pushing, and have secured a place at the first
table. We are not here by their leave, and we may go directly to the source of supplies. They
are not benefactors, but beneficiaries. The Spirit of Democracy insists that they shall know
their place. He rebukes even the Captains of Industry, and when they answer insolently, he
suggests that they be reduced to the ranks. Even toward bishops and other clergy his manner
lacks that perfect reverence that belonged to an earlier time; yet he listens to them respectfully
when they talk sense.

"It is this spirit that plays the mischief with many of the merry old ways of doing good. To
scatter turkeys or colleges among a multitude of gratefully dependent folks is the very poetry
of philanthropy. But to satisfy the curiosity of an independent citizen as to your title to
these things is a different matter. The more independent people are, the harder it is to do
good to them. They are apt to have their own ideas of what they want."

"It's a pity, then, to have them so independent," said Scrooge; "it spoils people to get above
their proper station in life."

"Ah! there you are," I answered; "I feared it would come to that. With all your exuberant good-will
you haven't altogether got beyond the theory that has come down from the time when the first
cave-dweller bestowed on his neighbor the bone he himself didn't need, and established the
pleasant relation of benefactor and beneficiary. It gave him such a warm feeling in his heart
that he naturally wanted to make the relation permanent. First Cave-dweller felt a little disappointed
next day when Second Cave-dweller, instead of coming to him for another bone, preferred to
take his pointed stick and go hunting on his own account. It seemed a little ungrateful in
him, and First Cave-dweller felt that it would be no more than right to arrange legislation
in the cave so that this should not happen again.

"Christian Charity is a very beautiful thing, but sometimes it gets mixed up with these ideas
of the cave-dwellers. Sometimes it perpetuates the very evils that it laments. Perhaps you
won't mind my reading a bit from a homily of St. Augustine on this very subject. St. Augustine
was a man who was a good many centuries ahead of his time. He begins his argument by saying:
'All love, dear brethren, consists in wishing well to those who are loved.' This seems like
a harmless proposition. It is the sort of thing you might hear in a sermon and think no more
about. But St. Augustine goes to the root of the matter, and asks what it means to wish well
to the person you are trying to help. He comes to the conclusion that if you really wish him
well, you must wish him to be at least as well off and as well able to take care of himself
as you are. The first thing you know, you are wishing to have him reach a point where he will
not look up to you at all. 'There is a certain friendliness by which we desire at one time
or another to do good to those we love. But how if there be no good that we can do? We ought
not to wish men to be wretched that we may be enabled to practice works of mercy. Thou givest
bread to the hungry, but better were it that none hungered and thou hadst none to give to.
Thou clothest the naked; oh, that all men were clothed and that this need existed not! Take
away the wretched, and the works of mercy will be at an end, but shall the ardor of charity
be quenched? With a truer touch of love thou lovest the happy man to whom there is no good
office that thou canst do; purer will that love be and more unalloyed. For if thou hast done
a kindness to the wretched, perhaps thou wishest him to be subject to thee. He was in need,
thou didst bestow; thou seemest to thyself greater because thou didst bestow than he upon whom
it was bestowed. Wish him to be thine equal.'

"There, Scrooge, is the text for the little Christmas sermon that I should like to preach to
you and to your elderly wealthy friends who feel that they are not so warmly appreciated as
they once were. 'Wish him to be thine equal'--that is the test of charity. It is all right
to give a poor devil a turkey. But are you anxious that he shall have as good a chance as you
have to buy a turkey for himself? Are you really enthusiastic about so equalizing opportunities
that by and by you shall be surrounded by happy, self-reliant people who have no need of your
benefactions?

"Do you know, Scrooge, I sometimes think that it is time for some one to write a new 'Christmas
Carol,' a carol that will make the world know how people are feeling and some of the best things
they are doing in these days. It should be founded on Justice and not on Mercy. We should feed
up Bob Cratchit and put some courage into him, and he should come to you and ask a living wage
not as a favor, but as a right. And you, Scrooge, would not be offended at him, but you would
sit down like a sensible man and figure it out with him. And when the talk was over, you wouldn't
feel particularly generous, and he wouldn't feel particularly grateful; it would be simple
business. But you would like each other better, and the business would seem more worth while.

"And then, when you went out with the Spirit of Christmas, you would ask the Spirit of Democracy
to go with you and show you the new things that are most worth seeing. He wouldn't wait for
the night, for the cheeriest things would be those that go on during business hours. He would
show you some sights to make your heart glad. He would show you vast numbers of persons who
have got tired of the worship of the Blessed Inequalities, and who are going in for the Equalities.
They have a suspicion that there is not so much difference between the Great and the Small
as has been supposed, and that what difference there is does not prevent a frank comradeship
and a perfect understanding. They think it is better to work with people than to work for them.
They think that one of the inalienable rights of man is the right to make his own mistakes
and to learn the lesson from them without too much prompting. So they are a little shy of many
of the more intrusive forms of philanthropy. But you should see what they are up to.

"The Spirit of Democracy will take you to visit a school that is not at all like the school
you used to go to, Scrooge. The teacher has forgotten his rod and his rules and his airs of
superiority. He is not teaching at all, so far as you can see. He is the centre of a group
of eager learners, who are using their own wits and not depending on his. They are so busy
observing, comparing, reasoning, and finding out things for themselves that he can hardly get
in a word edgewise. And he seems to like it, though it is clear that if they keep on at this
rate they will soon get ahead of their teacher.

"And the Spirit of Democracy will take you to a children's court, where the judge does not
seem like a judge at all, but like a big brother who shows the boys what they ought to do and
sees that they do it. He will take you to a little republic, where boys and girls who have
defied laws that they did not understand are making laws of their own and enforcing them in
a way that makes the ordinary citizen feel ashamed of himself. They do it all so naturally
that you wonder that nobody had thought of the plan before. He will take you to pleasant houses
in unpleasant parts of the city, and there you will meet pleasant young people who are having
a very good time with their neighbors and who are getting to be rather proud of their neighborhood.
After you have had a cup of tea, they may talk over with you the neighborhood problems. If
you have any sensible suggestion to make, these young people will listen to you; but if you
begin to talk condescendingly about the Poor, they will change the subject. They are not philanthropists--they
are only neighbors.

"I hope he may take you, Scrooge--this Spirit of Democracy--to some of the charity organizations
I know about. I realize that you are prejudiced against that sort of thing, it seems so cold
and calculating, compared with your impulsive way of doing good. And you will probably quote
the lines about

     Organized charity scrimped and iced
     In the name of a cautious, statistical Christ.

"Never mind about the statistics; they only mean that these people are doing business on a
larger scale than did the good people who could carry all the details in their heads. What
I want you to notice is the way in which the scientific interest does away with that patronizing
pity that was the hardest thing to bear in the old-time charities. These modern experts go
about mending broken fortunes in very much the same way in which surgeons mend broken bones.
The patient doesn't feel under any oppressive weight of obligation, he has given them such
a good opportunity to show their skill. And the doctors have caught the spirit, too. Instead
of looking wise and waiting for people to come to them in the last extremity, they have enlisted
in Social Service. You should see them going about opening windows, and forcing people to poke
their heads out into the night air, and making landlords miserable by their calculations about
cubic feet, and investigating sweat-shops and analyzing foodstuffs. It's their way of bringing
in a Merry Christmas.

"And the Spirit of Democracy will take you to workshops, where you may see the new kind of
Captain of Industry in friendly consultation with the new kind of Labor Leader. For the new
Captain is not a chief of banditti, interested only in the booty he can get for himself, and
the new Leader is not a conspirator waiting for a chance to plunge his knife into the more
successful bandit's back. These two are responsible members of a great industrial army, and
they realize their responsibility. They have not met to exchange compliments. They are not
sentimentalists, but shrewd men of affairs who have met to plan a campaign for the common welfare.
They don't take any credit for it, for they do not expect to give to any man any more than
his due; yet there are a good many Christmas dinners involved in the cool, business-like consultation.

"Afterward, the Spirit of Democracy will take you to a church where the minister is preaching
from the text, 'Ye are all kings and priests,' as if he believed it; and you will believe it
too, and go on your way wondering at the many sacred offices in the world.

"You will hurry on from the church to shake hands with the new kind of politician. He is not
the dignified 'statesman' you have read about and admired afar off, who has every qualification
for high office except the ability to get himself elected. All things considered,
is the sequence itself, since in devising succession, as we conceive
time.

[138.] The succession involves exclusion of some things together.
This exclusion may be based in essence the same, or arise from an
external cause. He has the idea that what all of us want is better than
what some few of us want, and that when all of us make up our minds to work together we can
get what we want without asking anybody's leave. He thinks that what all of us want is fair
play, and so he goes straight for that without much regard for special interests. It is a simple
programme, but it's wonderful what a difference it makes.

"There never was a time, Scrooge, when the message of good-will was so widely interpreted in
action, or when it took hold of so many kinds of men. Perhaps you wouldn't mind my reading
another little bit from St. Augustine: 'Two are those to whom thou doest alms; two hunger,
one for bread, the other for righteousness. Between these two famishing persons thou, the doer
of the good work, art set. The one craves what he may eat, the other craves what he may imitate.
Thou feedest the one, give thyself as a pattern to the other, so hast thou given to both. The
one thou hast caused to thank thee for satisfying his hunger, the other thou hast made to imitate
thee by setting him a worthy example.'

"It is this hunger for simple justice that is the great thing. In those counties the priest in charge of managing religious
interests of free flock derives its authority from the believers who place their trust in him
and the bishop does nothing to confirm the election or consecrate. It's a wonderful giving, this giving of one's self,
and people do appreciate it. When you have ministered to a person's self-respect, when you
have contributed to his self-reliance, when you have inspired him to self-help, you have given
him something. And you are conscious of it, and so is he, though you both find it hard to express
in the old terms. All the old Christmas cheer is in these reciprocities of friendship that
have lost every touch of condescension. We need some genial imagination to picture to us all
the happiness that is being diffused by people who have come to look upon themselves not as
God's almoners, but as sharers with others in the Common Good. I wish we had a new Dickens
to write it up."

"If you are waiting for that, you will wait a long time," said Scrooge.

"Perhaps so, but the people are here all the same, and they are getting on with their work."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Riverside Press

Cambridge. Massachusetts

U . S . A

