THE AGONY
                             OF THE CHURCH

                               BY THE REV.
                       NICHOLAI VELIMIROVIC, D.D.
                    OF ST SAVVA'S COLLEGE, BELGRADE

                          WITH FOREWORD BY THE
                       REV. ALEXANDER WHYTE, D.D.
                  PRINCIPAL OF NEW COLLEGE, EDINBURGH
                                 LONDON

                      STUDENT CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT
                        32 RUSSELL SQUARE, W.C.

                                   1917

                       Printed in Great Britain
                   by Turnbull & Spears, Edinburgh.

                                 FOREWORD

The Eastern Church, the Church of the Apostles and the Mother of us all, in this book, speaks
to her children in all lands and in all languages, and to us, with an authority and a wisdom
and a tenderness all its own. The author and the publishers are doing us a service of the very
best kind in issuing it. May God's blessing rest upon it.

                          PUBLISHER'S FOREWORD

The contents of this book was originally given in the form of lectures at St Margaret's, Westminster.
There is, we think, a special fitness in the lectures appearing in book form bearing the imprint
of the Student Christian Movement, for though Father Nicholas has hosts of friends in Great
Britain now, when he first came here our Movement was perhaps the only body which had the right
to claim him as being already a friend. When the Student Christian Movement made its way to
Serbia a few years ago, Father Nicholas became one of its first friends and, the year the war
commenced and the following year, it was he who, on the Universal Day of Prayer for Students,
preached by invitation of the Student Movement and its President, Dr. Marko Leko, to the students
in the Cathedrals of Belgrade and Nish. Members of our Movement, therefore, will recognise
that he comes under the category of persons so highly valued in the Student Movement, namely,
that of senior friend.

Both inside and outside the Student Movement to-day people are thinking of the Church. Much
has been spoken and written about the Church of Jesus Christ in our modern world, but not so
much as to leave us unready to welcome this arresting and penetrating message from Serbia.

                         INTRODUCTORY THOUGHTS

If the official churches have had no other merit but that they have preserved Christ as the
treasury of the world, yet they are justified thereby. Even if they have solely repeated through
all the past centuries "Lord! Lord!" still they stand above the secular world. For they know
at least who the Lord is, whereas the world does not know.

Churches may disappear, but The Church never will. For not churches are the work of Christ,
but the Church. Moreover, if the Church disappears, as an institution, the essence of the Church
cannot disappear. It is like rivers, sea and water: when rivers disappear into the sea, the
sea remains, and if the sea disappears into steam, water still remains.

If Christ ever meant to form the Church as an institution He meant to form it not as the end
but as the means, like a boat to bring its inmates safely over the stormy ocean of life into
the quiet harbour of His Kingdom.

Like the body in a bath, so the soul disrobes in the Church to wash. But as soon as we get
out, we clothe our soul in order to conceal it from the curious eye. Is it not illogical that
we dare to show our imperfections to the Most Perfect, while we are ashamed to show them to
those who are just as imperfect, ugly and unclean as ourselves? The Church, like a bath, reveals
most uncleanness.

The initial and most obvious idea of the Church is collectiveness of sin and salvation. To
pray alone and for one's self is like eating alone without regard to other people's hunger.

When the sun sees a man of science, wealth or politics, kneeling at prayer with the poor and
humble, it goes smiling to its rest.

Full of beauty and wonders are all the Christian churches, but not because of their pretended
perfections: they are beautiful and wonderful because of Him whose shadow they are.

You are a Christian? Then do not be afraid to enter any Christian church with prayerful respect.
All the Churches have sworn allegiance to the same Sovereign. How can you respect a cottage,
in which once abided His Majesty King Alfred, or Charles, while you would not go into a building
dedicated to His Majesty the Invisible King of kings?

The real value of any Christian community is not to be found in its own prosperity but in its
care for the prosperity of other Christian communities. So, for example, the value of the Protestants
is to be found in their loving care for the Roman Catholics, and vice versa.

Taking the above standard, we find that all the Christian communities are almost quite valueless
as to the spirit, i.e. as to their unusual loving care. Their actual value is more physical
than spiritual, being as they are limited to the care for themselves. Exceptions are as refreshing
as an oasis in the desert.

Church and State are like fire and water. How to connect them? For if connected, fire always
dies down under water.

There are three ages in the history of the Church: the Golden Age, when the Church was opposed
to political governments; the Iron Age, when she was politically directing Europe's kingdoms;
and the Stone Age, when she has been subdued to the service of political governments. What
a humiliation for the present generation to live in the Stone Age of Christianity!

Trying to unite Church and State we are trying to unite what God separated from the beginning
of our era.

To separate the Church from the State does not mean, as many think, to separate soul from body;
it means to separate two quite opposed spirits unakin and hostile to each other, like Cross
and Capitol.

The worm of comfort and human inertia has reconciled Christianity with secular, pagan governments,
and so paralysed the most divine movement in human history. Go to the bottom of all those clever
advocacies for unity of Church and State, and you will meet, as their primus motor, the worm
of comfort and human inertia.

All Churches and Christian institutions of the present time, however wonderful they may be,
are only a dim prophecy of the coming Christian worship in truth and spirit. It appealed to the
eighteenth-century mind as adequate, and more than one translator,
professing to give rules for translation, merely repeated in his own
words what Dryden had already said.

Garth declares in the preface condemned by Johnson: "Translation is commonly either verbal,
a paraphrase, or an imitation.... The manner that seems most suitable for this present undertaking
is neither to follow the author too close out of a critical timorousness,
nor abandon him too wantonly through a poetic boldness.

 So we are
walking over and around Christ, still using in our daily life the pagan gods of old.

If there is to be a new geological epoch, with a new type of man, it will be the Christian
epoch. All the existing types have been made by revolutions and influences of earth and water,
or of air and fire. Now only the Christian revolution--I mean literally and not allegorically--can
produce a higher type of the human animal.

My friend, you are dissatisfied with the existing Churches, and you are anxious to form a new
church, or sect, or some kind of religious organisation! How childish of you! The existing
Churches are the most wonderful vessels--some in gold, others in silver or pottery--made by
thousands of years and generations. I know your dissatisfaction comes because of the emptiness
of those vessels and not because of their ugliness. Well then, pour the divine wine into them
and they will please you just as the vessels in Cana of Galilee pleased the thirsty people
around the table. No one of those people, being thirsty, ever thought of making new vessels
for the wine, but to get wine as soon as possible into the vessels. To pour wine into existing
vessels, that is really the needed miracle, my dear grumbler!

People say: Read the Bible! Almost would I say: Do not touch it for five years--read other
literature during this period--and then read it again, and you will see its real greatness,
power and sweetness.

The Christ's wounds have wrought more blessings in the world than the health of all the Roman
Caears.

The Eucharist does not mean a memory only but also a prophecy. The prophecy of it is, that
the whole earth will become Christ's body, Christ's flesh and blood, so that whatever we eat
or drink we eat and drink Him.

He ought to be our daily food. Regarding all our food through Christ it will not seem to be
a prey from nature but rather nature's sacrifice for us, reminding us of Christ's sacrifice,
and through it of our own calling to sacrifice.

You have to choose either to be proud or poor in spirit. The first will mean a noisy destruction,
the second a quiet construction.

There exists no sublime and no mean thing in the whole world of which I could not find a representation
in myself, and none in which I were wholly unrepresented.

The beauty, glory and greatness of a field of golden wheat consists of an association of innumerable
blades of wheat, with their insignificant beauty, glory and greatness. If you have seen that,
then do not repeat to me the old story of the beauty, glory and greatness of the human blade
called Pythagoras, Caear or Napoleon.

The wealthiest and most powerful people, that we are wont to admire and imitate, were most
pitied by Christ. To-day, as always, the most difficult Christian mission is that among the rich.

Our real value we never reveal through the using of our rights but through our capacity for
service and sacrifice.

Easier is it for a man to get his own rights than to lose his pride.

Sacrifice without murmuring makes of our stormy life a calm holy day. We fill all our days
with the talk of the people who are loth to sacrifice and of those who dare to sacrifice. Disgust
and admiration are two baths in which our hearts bathe from sunrise to sunset. By nothing is
the disgust towards a man more excited than by hearing: "He is incapable of sacrifice." When
this sentence is directed to ourselves, we feel as if we had lost the whole battle of life.

The value of metaphysical systems is more for the scientific than for the moral progress of
mankind. Upon Hegel you could build a new science, but upon St Paul only could you build a
new social life and a new world politics. Did you ever think that St Paul is the greatest prophet
of a new and desirable statesmanship?

All the Empires founded upon rights have perished and must perish. The future belongs to the
Empire of St Paul, an Empire founded upon loving service.

It is better in humbleness to belong to the worst of the Churches than proudly to separate
one's self from the best of the Churches.

Aristocratic origin is as inscrutable as the darkness of the past night. A mighty aristocrat
of to-day may be of the meanest soul-stuff, and the beggar at his door of the noblest. But
respect both of them equally, knowing that both of them are of the same royal origin. The Most
High names both of them His children. For the same reason respect asses and sheep and trees
and stones.

The real crucifiers of Christ in our time are those who think Christ's Gospel could not be
taken as a base for world politics. Were not His last words to the disciples: go to all nations?
The last and supreme expression of Christianity will be in the relations of nation to nation,
as its starting expression has been the relations of man to man.

Inter-individualism has been the elementary school of Christianity. Inter-nationalism ought
to be its university.

Christian ethics, i.e. cheerful service and sacrifice, is the noblest consequence of real belief
in God. Never a shorter line can bind our planet with the centre of the Universe than the line
going through Christ. It is the shortest way, as a straight line is the shortest distance between
two geometrical points.

Slavery means obligatory service; freedom ought to mean willing service. Only a man or a nation
educated for willing service to their neighbours is a really free man or free nation. All other
theories of freedom are illusions. Freedom asking for rights and not for willing service means
an endless quarrel crowning with unhappiness all its champions. Neither Pericles' republic
nor Octavian's monarchy were the States of happiness, but St Paul's pan-human state, with a
single Magna Charta of willing service, will be a State of Universal Happiness.

Every man is a battlefield of many unclean spirits, very bold in the absence of Christ and
very shy in His Presence. O how many of these spirits that find an easy habitation in us would
make even the swine to rage and run down the steep place--into the sea!

The conception that the mentality of Machiavelli and Metternich, Bismarck and Beaconsfield
could be taken as a basis of politics, whereas Christ's mentality could not, is the conception
even of many theologians. Yet Christ survives all these politicians as an undying power, just
because He is the fittest of all of them.

What an obscure philosophy it is which teaches that Moses and Mohamed had some thing to do
with politics and Christ has not!

Carlyle and Emerson were over-anxious to recommend every great man as a leader of mankind more
than Christ. It is the same as to say: men! take candles and lamps to light your way in darkness,
but be aware of the sun. How quite different are Dostoievsky and Tolstoi!

I looked at men in prayer and I thought: Behold, the fallen angels! I looked again at them
in hateful quarrel and I thought: Behold, the risen demons!

Animals are cruel but not vulgar. Yet both in cruelty and vulgarity man is on record. If forced
to chose one of two evils, we should prefer to look at cruelty rather than vulgarity.

All our to-days are spoiled by reminiscences about yesterday and sorrows about tomorrow. Thus
we are disindividualising and emptying all our "to-days" and degrading them to a misty meeting-place
of yesterday and tomorrow.

From the physical point of view the greatest thing in this life is its mystery. From the moral
point of view the greatest thing in man is the optimistic interpretation of that mystery. There
is no reasonable optimism outside of Christianity.

No man could be a tyrant unless he were a slave of some moral defects.

No nation could tyrannise over another nation unless it were tyrannised over itself by some
illusions.

Nobody in the world is free but he who feels himself to be a prisoner of Christ. The greatest
champion of freedom in human history called himself: "Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ."

                               CHAPTER I

                   THE WISDOM OF THE CHURCH SOPHIA

The most magnificent sanctuary of the Eastern Churches is called St Sophia (Holy Wisdom), whereas
the most magnificent sanctuaries of the Western Churches are called St Peter's, St Paul's,
or St John's, etc. As every hair on our head and every line on the palm of our hand has a certain
significance, so these dedications of the Church have doubtless certain significance. And this
significance is typical of the religion of the East and the West. Western Christianity, grown
upon the soil of a youthful individualism, preferred this or that apostle's personality and
dedicated their best temples to him. The aged East, tired of individualistic ambitions, tired
of great men, flagellated by the phantom of human greatness, was thirsty for something higher
and more solid than any human personality. Adoration of great personalities being the very
wisdom of this world, the East stretched its hands to a superhuman ideal, to the Holy Wisdom.
It is a psychological fact that youth sees his ideal in personal greatness, progressed age
in holiness. The East asked for something more eternal than Peter, Paul or John. There is wisdom,
and there is holy wisdom. Philosophical or personal wisdom existed from the beginning of mankind,
but Holy Wisdom entered the world with Jesus Christ. Christ was the embodiment of God's wisdom,
the very incarnation of Holy Wisdom. This Wisdom stands above all human wisdom and revives
and illuminates it. Holy Wisdom includes the essential wisdom of Peter, Paul, John, and any
other apostle or seer, or any other thing or creature, as the ocean includes the water of many
rivers. In the darkest times of dissension, uncertainty or suffering, the Christian East did
not rely so much upon the great apostles, either Peter, or Paul, or John, but looked beyond
time and space to the Eternal Christ, The Logos of God, and asked for Light. And it looked
to Eternity through this church in Constantinople, St Sophia, as the all-embracing and all-reconciling,
holy symbol. Whenever Peter, or Paul, or John, or any other apostle, or prophet, became the
ground upon which the believers quarrelled, it was in the Holy Wisdom that they sought refuge
and healing from their intellectual one-sidedness and ill-will.

Yet if Holy Wisdom has only in the East a magnificent visible symbol, Holy Wisdom is none the
less the very foundation, substance and aim of the Western Church as well as of the Eastern,
yea of the one, holy Catholic Church. For Christianity had been destined neither for the East
alone nor for the West alone, but for the whole globe. And what means the so-much abused word
Catholic if not inclusiveness? Even such is, too, the meaning of the Divine wisdom as revealed
in Christianity from the beginning.

I will try to show this inclusive wisdom of the Church, revealed from the beginning, Firstly
in the Church's Founder, Secondly in the Church's organisation, and Thirdly in the Church's
destination.

             THE INCLUSIVE WISDOM OF THE CHURCH'S FOUNDER

By His birth He included and bound together the lowest and the highest, the natural and the
supernatural: stable, manger, straw, sheep and shepherds on the one hand; stars, angels, magi
and Davidic royal origin on the other.

By His life He included the austerity of the Indian monks, of John the Baptist and the Nazarenes
on the one hand; and on the other the Confucian moderate feasting, in the houses of friends,
at the marriage feast and on other solemn occasions.

His life-drama was interwoven into the lives of all classes of people: men, women and children,
Judaists and heathen, King Herod and the proconsul Pilate, priests and soldiers, merchants
and beggars, learned sophists and ignorant fools, the sick and the healthy, the righteous and
the sinful, Jews and Egyptians, Greeks and Romans, and all others who could be met in Palestine,
the very market of races and creeds.

He was by no means a party man like the Pharisees and the doctors of law. He called both the
Pharisees and their enemies to follow Him. He went to the temple to pray, but He also prayed
alone in the desert. He kept the Sabbath and He broke the Sabbath by healing the sick and doing
good on this sacred day. He came not to destroy the Law, but He brought something which was
higher than the Law and even included the law itself, i.e. love and mercy.

He rebuked people who used to pray and say. "Lord, Lord!" And yet He prayed very often Himself.
He rebuked those who were fasting, and yet He used to fast Himself. What He really looked for
was neither prayer nor fasting, but the spirit in which one prayed or fasted.

He commanded the people to give to Caesar things which were Caesar's, and to God that which
was God's. He did not criticise this or that form of government, nor did He accentuate Monarchism,
Republicanism, or Socialism as one form preferable to another. Under His scheme all forms of
government were included as equally good or evil according to what place they reserved for
God, what gifts they duly gave to God, and by what spirit they were inspired.

He followed the customs of His nation, and did not break them or evade them purposely. He took
food according to the Law, and washed hands according to the Law, and went to the Holy City
and took part in worship in the temple (though He was "greater than the temple"), according
to the Law. It seems that He excluded no form of worship or social life, though He despised
the unclean and petty spirit with which the hypocrites filled these forms. And when it came
to a dispute He, the Messenger of a new spirit, naturally tried to save rather the pure spirit
even without a form than a form filled with an impure spirit. Therefore He felt bound to say:
"Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man," or "to eat with unwashen hands defileth
not a man," or "thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet," etc.

Even so, too, He embraced all nationalities and races. Nothing was for Him unclean that God
had created, nothing but unclean spirits. When the Roman centurion asked help from Him, He
gave it. And when the people beyond the Israelitish boundaries, from the coasts of Tyre and
Sidon, cried after Him, He did not listen to the exclusivistic warnings of His disciples, but
He distributed even there His divine mercy. He was mindful even of the people of Nineveh. And
when He sent His disciples, He sent them to "all nations."

Finally, He included the natural and the supernatural. He talked with spirits. He saw Satan
as lightning fall from heaven. He stood amongst Peter, John and James on one side, and Moses
and Elias on the other. All the people saw lilies in the field and sparrows upon the roof,
but He saw more, He saw how, His Father clothed the lilies and how He fed the sparrows. He
united the natural and the supernatural in His teaching.

"Love those who love thee" was a natural teaching. But He added: "and those who hate and persecute
thee," which was supernatural.

"Give to them who give to thee" was a natural teaching. But He added: "and to them who do not
give to the", which was supernatural.

"Bless those who bless thee." But He added: "and those who curse thee," which was supernatural.

And He united the natural and supernatural in His death. He suffered and died in agony. He
rose from the dead, descended to Hell and ascended to Heaven. For Him there was as little boundary
between heaven and earth, between nature and supernature, as between Israel and Canaan, or
as between man and man, or form and form.

His wisdom was inclusive from the beginning to the end. What did He ever exclude--save unclean
spirits? His disciples were as exclusive as anybody could be, exclusive when judging and acting
according to natural wisdom. But when they looked at Him, they were reconciled. He was the
Holy Wisdom, in which everyone could find a mansion for himself, every disciple, every nation,
every form of worship, everything--but the unclean spirit.

          THE INCLUSIVE WISDOM IN THE CHURCH'S ORGANISATION

Let us look now to the Christian Church in the early time of her formation. 

A similar objection to the employment of a "plain" style in telling the Troy story was made,
it will be remembered, in the early fifteenth century by Wyntoun.

The matter of decorum was to receive further attention in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries.

In general, however, the comment associated with verse translations does not anticipate that of
later times and is scarcely more significant than that which accompanies the novella. So long,
indeed, as the theory of translation was so largely concerned with
the claims of the reader, there was little room for initiative.

It was no mark of originality to say that the translation must be profitable or entertaining,
clear and easily understood; these rules had already been laid down
by generations of translators. Well, Jesus was the second Adam, the expected Redeemer,
God's Messenger.

Egypt had an intuition into the mystery of the Divinity as a Trinity. However rough may have
been that idea, the Trinity being thought of as a human family of Father, Mother, and Son,
still it existed very vividly in Egypt. And the people expected the coming of God's only Son,
the third person of their Trinity, not an imaginary being like Horus, but the real son of Osiris
in flesh and blood who would bring happiness to men. Well, Jesus of Nazareth was this Son of
God, and He as Christ was the eternal sharer of the Divine Trinity.

India was the cradle of the teaching of the Incarnation. The supreme God, Brahma, had already
been incarnated in many persons since the dawn of history. But the highest incarnation of Him
was still to come. Well, Jesus Christ was this highest incarnation of Brahma in human shape.

The cultivated polytheists did not like the idea of a monotonous theology of one solitary God.
They liked rather a divine company upon Olympus. Well, Christianity with its Trinity-teaching
presented to them a limited polytheism. God was not physically one, as in Judaism, nor many,
as in Hellenism. He was a Trinitarian Plurality in Unity. He was not a grim hermit, but He
had the riches of an eternal life.

The intellectual Greeks and Hellenists climbed to the idea of one God and of Logos, the Mediator
between God and the world, through whom God created whatever He created, and who may be incarnated
for the salvation of the fallen, suffering creation. Well, Jesus Christ could include in His
person this wonderful doctrine of Neoplatonism.

The mountainous Asia under Caucasus and Ararat, plunged into the mystery of Mithras, which
was born out of the Zoroastrian dualistic religion of light and darkness, of Ormuzd and Ahriman.
Well now, Christ, the friend of humanity, revealed Himself as the God of light struggling against
Satan, the enemy of humanity.

Rome, politically ruling the world, was longing for a sacred King, for a Prince of Peace, who
should come from the East and bring to the people some higher and truer happiness than that
deceiving chimera of political bigness. Well, Christ should be this universal, sacred King,
this Prince of Peace, and Messenger of a durable happiness. It is not true that Christ had
His prophets among the people of Israel only. His prophets existed in every race and every
religion and philosophy of old. That is the reason why the whole world could claim Christ,
and how He can be preached to everybody and accepted by everybody. Behold, He was at home everywhere!

(b) Inclusive in Worship.--Inclusive in doctrine, the primitive Church was wisely inclusive
in worship too. It would be nonsense to speak of Christian worship as of something quite new
and surprising. There was very little new and very little surprising in it indeed; almost nothing.
The first Church met for prayer in the Jewish temple. Wherever the apostles came to preach
the new Gospel they went to the old places of prayer, to the temples of Jehovah. Their Christian
spirit did not revolt against the old forms of worship. Later on the naked Christian spirit
needed to be clothed, and it was clothed. But when Israel looked to Christian worship they
recognised much--forms, signs, vestments and administration--to be like their own. And not
only Israel, but even Egypt, India, Babylon and Persia, Greece and Rome, yea, the Pagans of
North and South. If Nature could speak, it could say how much it lent of its own to Christian
worship.

A student of ancient history one day asked me: "How can I recognise the Christian religion
as the best of all, when I know how much it borrowed from the ancient religious forms of worship?
How poor it looks without all that!"

I said: "Just this wonderful power of embracing and assimilating gives evidence of the vitality
and universality of Christianity. It is too large in spirit to be clothed by one nation or
one race only. It is too rich in spirit and destination to be expressed by one tongue, by one
sign, or one symbol, or one form. In the same sense as Christian doctrine was prepared and
prophesied by the religions and the philosophies before Christ, in the same sense Christian
worship was prepared and prophesied as well. Whenever the Christian spirit is strong the Church
is not afraid of worship being strange, and ample, and even grotesque. The weaker the Christian
spirit, the greater exclusiveness in worship. Some people say: It is wicked to use pagan architecture
for the Church, and incense and fire, and music, or dance, or bowing, or kneeling, or signs
and symbols, in Christian worship, because it is pagan." Yes, all this is pagan indeed, but
it is Christian too if we wish it to be. The Latin language was pagan, but now it is Christian
too. The English language was a vehicle of Paganism as well, now it is a vehicle of Christianity.
The human body was itself pagan too, but the Eternal Christ, God's Holy Wisdom, entered it
and filled it with a new spirit, and it ceased to be pagan. We in the East sometimes use for
our sacerdotal vestments Chinese silk made by pagan hands in China, or chalices and spoons
and little bells and chains made by the Moslems, or precious stones gathered and scents prepared
by the fire or stone-worshippers of Africa, and no one of us should be afraid to use them when
worshipping Christ, as Christ Himself was not afraid to touch the most wretched human bodies
or souls with His pure hands. Christianity cannot be defiled, using for its worship the works
of pagan hands, but pagan people are hereby taking a share in Christian worship, physically
and unconsciously, waiting for the moment when they will share in it spiritually and consciously
as well. Every piece of Chinese silk in our vestments is a prophecy of the great Christian
China. But this belongs to the following paragraph.

          THE INCLUSIVE WISDOM IN THE CHURCH'S DESTINATION

Judaism was destined for the people of Israel only. The Christian Church was destined for the
people of Israel too, but not for them only. She included Greeks as well.

The Greek polytheism of Olympus was destined for the Hellenic race only. The Christian Church
was destined for the Hellenic race too, but not for it only. She included Indians as well.

Buddha's wisdom was offered to the monks and vegetarians. Monks and vegetarians the Christian
Church included in her lap, but also married and social people too.

Pythagoras founded a religious society of intellectual aristocrats. The Christian Church from
the beginning included intellectual aristocrats side by side with the ignorant and unlettered.

The Persian prophet, Zoroaster, recruited soldiers of the god of light among the best men to
fight against the god of darkness. His religious institution was like a military barracks.
The Christian Church included both the best and the worst, the righteous and the sinners, the
healthy and the sick. It was a barracks and a hospital at the same time. It was an institution
both for spiritual fighting and spiritual healing.

The Chinese sage, Confucius, preached a wonderful ethical pragmatism, and the profound thinker,
Lao-Tse, preached an all-embracing spiritualism. Christian wisdom included both of them, opening
Heaven for the first and showing the dramatic importance of the physical world for the second.
Islam--yes, Islam had in some sense a Christian ambition: to win the whole world. The difference
was: Islam wished world-conquest; the Church, the world's salvation. Islam intended to subdue
all men and bring them before God as His servants: The Church intended to educate all men,
to purify and elevate them, and to bring them before God as His children.

And all others: star-worshippers, and fire, and wood, and water, and stone, and animal-worshippers
had a touching sense of the immediate divine presence in nature. The Church came not to extinguish
this sense but to explain and to subordinate it; to put God in the place of demons and hope
instead of fear.

The Church came not to destroy, but to purify, to aid and to assimilate. The destination of
the Church was neither national nor racial, but cosmic. No exclusive power was ever destined
to be a world-power. The ultimate failure of Islam to become a world-power lies in its exclusiveness.
It was with religion as with politics. Every exclusive policy is foredoomed to failure: the
German as well as the Turkish and the Napoleonic. The policy of the Church was designed by
her Divine Founder: "He that is not against us is for us." Well, there is no human race on
earth wholly against Christ and wholly unprepared to receive Him. The wisdom of the Christian
missionaries therefore is to see first in what ways Providence has prepared a soil for Christian
seed; to see which of the Christian elements a race, or a religion, already possesses, and
how to utilise these elements and weld them into Christianity. All that--in order to make Christianity
grow organically, instead of pushing it mechanically.

In conclusion let me repeat again: the wisdom of the Church has been inclusive. Inclusive was
the wisdom of her Founder, inclusive the wisdom of her organisation and of her destination.
Exclusiveness was the very sickness and weakness of the Church. That is why we in the East
in the time of sickness of the Church looked neither towards Peter, nor Paul, nor John, but
towards the Holy Wisdom, the all-healing and all-illuminating. For St Sophia in Constantinople,
the temple dedicated to Christ the Eternal, includes in itself the sanctuaries of Peter, Paul
and John; moreover, it is supported even by some pillars of Diana's temple from Ephesus and
has many other things, in style or material, which belonged to the Paganism of old. Indeed,
St Sophia has room and heart even for Islam. The Mohamedans have been praising it as the best
of their sanctuaries!

I speak thus to you because I am sure you will not misunderstand me. And because I know you,
the British, to be a race of the world-wide spirit, I dare to make this appeal to you.

Look to the Holy Wisdom! Look beyond Peter, and Paul, and John--through them and still beyond
them! Every Church has her prophet, her apostle, her angel. Look now over them all to the very
top of the pyramid, where all the lines meet!

Either Christianity is one, or there is no Christianity. Either the Church is universal, or
there is no Church.

