THE UNCOLLECTED WRITINGS
                                      OF
                              THOMAS DE QUINCEY.

                                     WITH
                           A PREFACE AND ANNOTATIONS
                                      BY
                                  JAMES HOGG.

                            IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

                                    LONDON:
                           SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.,
                              PATERNOSTER SQUARE.

                                     1890.

                         RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,

                               LONDON & BUNGAY.

CONTENTS.

                                                  PAGE
THE ENGLISH IN CHINA.                                7

SHAKSPERE'S TEXT.--SUETONIUS UNRAVELLED.            37

HOW TO WRITE ENGLISH.                               55

THE CASUISTRY OF DUELLING.                          65

THE LOVE-CHARM.                                    113

LUDWIG TIECK.                                      153

LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT.--THE HOUSE OF WEEPING.    160

THE HOUSEHOLD WRECK.                               173

MR. SCHNACKENBERGER; OR, TWO MASTERS FOR ONE DOG.  279

ANGLO-GERMAN DICTIONARIES.                         348

THE ENGLISH IN CHINA.

This Paper, originally written for me in 1857, and published in Titan for July of that year,
has not appeared in any collective edition of the author's works, British or American. It was
his closing contribution to a series of three articles concerning Chinese affairs; prepared
when our troubles with that Empire seemed to render war imminent. The first two were given
in Titan for February and April, 1857, and then issued with additions in the form of a pamphlet
which is now very scarce. It consisted of 152 pages thus arranged:--(1) Preliminary Note, i-iv;
(2) Preface, pp. 3-68; (3) China (the two Titan papers), pp. 69-149; (4) Postscript, pp. 149-152.

In the posthumous supplementary volume (XVI.) of the collected works the third section was
reprinted, but all the other matter was discarded--with a rather imperfect appreciation of
the labour which the author had bestowed upon it, and his own estimate of the value of what
he had condensed in this Series--as frequently expressed to me during its progress.

In the twelfth volume of the 'Riverside' Edition of De Quincey's works, published by Houghton,
Mifflin & Co., Boston, U.S.A., the whole of the 152 pp. of the expanded China reprint are given,
but not the final section here reproduced from Titan.

The Chinese questions stirred DE QUINCEY profoundly, and roused all the 'John Bullism' of his
nature. Two passages from the 'Preliminary Note' will show his object in throwing so much energy
into this subject:--

NATIONAL MORALITY.

'Its purpose[1] is to diffuse amongst those of the middle classes, whose daily occupations
leave them small leisure for direct personal inquiries, some sufficient materials for appreciating
the justice of our British pretensions and attitude in our coming war with China. It is a question
frequently raised amongst public journalists, whether we British are entitled to that exalted
distinction which sometimes we claim for ourselves, and which sometimes is claimed on our behalf,
by neutral observers on the national practice of morality. 

Thus, in the valleys of the Rhone, the Rhine and its tributaries and Ticino, as in the banks lakes
in the central region (particularly those of Geneva, Neuchâtel, district in Zurich and Constance)
the vines are the mainstay of agriculture. A 200 or 300 meters above, in hilly plains and valleys,
the fields are covered with vegetables, cereals, grains and vegetables of all kinds, and fruit
trees in great abundance, such as apple, pear, apricot and plum. You climb a little more and beech
forests appear or varieties oak, hazel bushes endless wild and many other fruit trees resistant
as the cherry. Legumes are scarce or missing, the corn do not thrive, replaced for hay, everything
changes in appearance. Another overlapping area live only conifers ie pine and spruce incredible
variety of species, and weeds rough. Above away those dark halls of the high mountains, leaving
the field almost exclusively to dwarf grass, extending towards the tops of huge and thick skirts
carpets. Above is the region of dwarf ferns, lichens and mosses pale ink or dark. Finally, all vegetation
is gone, life ends smiling all forms, coagulate water or filtered to get lost in the depths
underground, and are not but granite deserts and icy seas, where you only feel the shrill cry
of the eagle or the terrifying roar of the storm .... At those heights the sun itself often lost splendor,
the loneliness of an eternal winter reigns over unfathomable depths, which keep concavities in
the wondrous mystery of the physiology of the globe.

This wide range of temperatures and simultaneous production of Swiss flora, has given birth naturally
many orders of industries and customs, staggered from the bottom
of the valleys to the highest eminences habitable.

Thus, towards the margins of lakes and rivers is the active traveler cities manufacturers, manufacturing
and trade, such as Geneva, Lausanne and Vevey, Neuchâtel, Lucerne, district in Zurich, Basel and
Schaffhausen, and numerous farmers vineyards and boatmen. In the region located immediately above
the fine arts, works hand sensitive, such as watch-making, wood carving, ceramics, hats straw,
lace and embroidery, in La Chaux-de-Fonds, Bern, Fribourg, St. Gall, Appenzell, etc. Through
the area above the picturesque villas, dairies, pastures covered cattle, life and gentle manners
pastor.


       *       *       *       *       *

The position and outcome of matters in those critical years may be recalled by a few lines
from the annual summaries of The Times on the New Years' days of 1858 and 1859. These indicate
that DE QUINCEY was here a pretty fair exponent of the growing wrath of the English people.

[January 1, 1858.]

'The presence of the China force on the Indian Seas was especially fortunate. The demand for
reinforcements at Calcutta (caused by the Indian Mutiny) was obviously more urgent than the
necessity for punishing the insolence at Canton. At a more convenient season the necessary
operations in China will be resumed, and in the meantime the blockading squadron has kept the
offending population from despising the resentment of England. The interval which has elapsed
has served to remove all reasonable doubt of the necessity of enforcing redress. Public opinion
has not during the last twelvemonth become more tolerant of barbarian outrages. There is no
reason to believe that the punishment of the provincial authorities will involve the cessation
of intercourse with the remainder of the Chinese Empire.'

       *       *       *       *       *

[January 1, 1859.]

'The working of our treaties with China and Japan will be watched with curiosity both in and
out of doors, and we can only hope that nothing will be done to blunt the edge of that masterly
decision by which these two giants of Eastern tale have been felled to the earth, and reduced
to the level and bearing of common humanity.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The titles which follow are those which were given by DE QUINCEY himself to the three Sections.--H.

HINTS TOWARDS AN APPRECIATION OF THE COMING WAR IN CHINA.

Said before the opening of July, that same warning remark may happen to have a prophetic rank,
and practically, a prophetic value, which two months later would tell for mere history, and
history paid for by a painful experience.

The war which is now approaching wears in some respects the strangest features that have yet
been heard of in old romance, or in prosaic history, for we are at war with the southernmost
province of China--namely, Quantung, and pre-eminently with its chief city of Canton, but not
with the other four commercial ports of China, nor; in fact, at present with China in general;
and, again, we are at war with Yeh, the poisoning Governor of Canton, but (which is strangest
of all) not with Yeh's master--the Tartar Emperor--locked up in a far-distant Peking.

Another strange feature in this war is--the footing upon which our alliances stand. For allies,
it seems, we are to have; nominal, as regards the costs of war, but real and virtual as regards
its profits. The French, the Americans,[3] and I believe the Belgians, have pushed forward
(absolutely in post-haste advance of ourselves) their several diplomatic representatives, who
are instructed duly to lodge their claims for equal shares of the benefits reaped by our British
fighting, but with no power to contribute a single file towards the bloodshed of this war,
nor a single guinea towards its money costs. Napoleon I., in a craze of childish spite towards
this country, pleased himself with denying the modern heraldic bearings of Great Britain, and
resuscitating the obsolete shield of our Plantagenets; he insisted that our true armorial ensigns
were the leopards. But really the Third Napoleon is putting life and significance into his
uncle's hint, and using us, as in Hindostan they use the cheeta or hunting-leopard, for rousing
and running down his oriental game. It is true, that in certain desperate circumstances, when
no opening remains for pacific negotiation, these French and American agents are empowered
to send home for military succours. A worshipful prospect, when we throw back our eyes upon
our own share in these warlike preparations, with all the advantages of an unparalleled marine.
Six months have slipped away since Lord Clarendon, our Foreign Secretary, received, in Downing
Street, Sir J. Bowring's and Admiral Seymour's reports of Yeh's atrocities. Six calendar months,
not less, but more, by some days, have run past us since then; and though some considerable
part of our large reinforcements must have reached their ground in April, and even the commander-in-chief
(Sir John Ashburnham) by the middle of May, yet, I believe, that many of the gun-boats, on
which mainly will rest the pursuit of Yeh's junks, if any remain unabsconded northwards, have
actually not yet left our own shores. The war should naturally have run its course in one campaign.
Assuredly it will, if confined within the limits of Yeh's command, even supposing that command
to comprehend the two Quangs. Practically, then, it is a fantastic impossibility that any reversionary
service to our British expedition, which is held out in prophetic vision as consecrating our
French and American friends from all taint of mercenary selfishness, ever can be realised.
I am not going to pursue this subject. But a brief application of it to a question at this
moment (June 16) urgently appealing to public favour is natural and fair. Canvassers are now
everywhere moving on behalf of a ship canal across the Isthmus of Suez. This canal proposes
to call upon the subscribers for £9,000,000 sterling; the general belief is, that first and
last it will call for £12,000,000 to £15,000,000. But at that price, or at any price, it is
cheap; and ultimate failure is impossible. Why do I mention it? Everywhere there is a rumour
that 'a narrow jealousy' in London is the bar which obstructs this canal speculation. There
is, indeed, and already before the canal proposal there was, a plan in motion for a railway
across the isthmus, which seems far enough from meeting the vast and growing necessities of
the case. But be that as it may, with what right does any man in Europe, or America, impute
narrowness of spirit, local jealousy, or selfishness, to England, when he calls to mind what
sacrifices she is at this moment making for those very oriental interests which give to the
ship canal its sole value--the men, the ships, the money spent, or to be spent, upon the Canton
war, and then in fairness connects that expense (or the similar expense made by her in 1840-42)
with the operative use to which, in those years, she applied all the diplomatic concessions
extorted by her arms. The first word--a memorable word--which she uttered on proposing her
terms in 1842, was, What I demand for myself, that let all Christendom enjoy. And since that
era (i. e., for upwards of fourteen years) all Christendom, that did not fail in the requisite
energy for improving the opportunities then first laid open, has enjoyed the very same advantages
in Chinese ports as Great Britain; secondly, without having contributed anything whatever to
the winning or the securing of these advantages; thirdly, on the pure volunteer intercession
made by Britain on their behalf. The world has seen enough of violence and cruelties, the most
bloody in the service of commercial jealousies, and nowhere more than in these oriental regions:
witness the abominable acts of the Dutch at Amboyna, in Japan, and in Java, &c.; witness the
bigoted oppressions, where and when soever they had power, of the colonising Portuguese and
Spaniards. Tyranny and merciless severities for the ruin of commercial rivals have been no
rarities for the last three and a half centuries in any region of the East. But first of all,
from Great Britain in 1842 was heard the free, spontaneous proclamation--this was a rarity--unlimited
access, with advantages the very same as her own, to a commerce which it was always imagined
that she laboured to hedge round with repulsions, making it sacred to her own privileged use.
A royal gift was this; but a gift which has not been received by Christendom in a corresponding
spirit of liberal appreciation. One proof of that may be read in the invidious statement, supported
by no facts or names, which I have just cited. Were this even true, a London merchant is not
therefore a Londoner, or even a Briton. Germans, Swiss, Frenchmen, &c., are settled there as
merchants, in crowds. No nation, however, is compromised by any act of her citizens acting
as separate and uncountenanced individuals. So that, even if better established as a fact,
this idle story would still be a calumny; and as a calumny it would merit little notice. Nevertheless,
I have felt it prudent to give it a prominent station, as fitted peculiarly, by the dark shadows
of its malice, pointed at our whole nation collectively, to call into more vivid relief the
unexampled lustre of that royal munificence in England, which, by one article of a treaty,
dictated at the point of her bayonets, threw open in an hour, to all nations, that Chinese
commerce, never previously unsealed through countless generations of man.

[3] 'America:'--For America in particular there is an American defence offered in a Washington
paper (the Weekly Union, for May 28, 1857), which, for cool ignoring of facts, exceeds anything
that I remember. It begins thus:--'Since our treaty with China in 1844' (and that, be it remembered,
was possible only in consequence of our war and its close in 1842), 'the most amicable relations
have existed between the United States and China--China is our friend, and we are hers.' Indeed!
as a brief commentary upon that statement, I recommend to the reader's attention our Blue-books
on China of last winter. The American commander certainly wound up his quarrel with Yeh in
a mysterious way, that drew some sneers from the various nationalities then moving in that
neighbourhood, but no less certainly he had, during the October of 1856, a smart exchange of
cannon-shots with Yeh, which lasted for some days (three, at least, according to my remembrance),
and ended in the capture of numerous Chinese forts. The American apologist says in effect,
that the United States will not fight, because they have no quarrel. But that is not the sole
question. Does the United States mean to take none of the benefits that may be won by our arms?
He speaks of the French as more belligerently inclined than the United States. Would that this
were really so. No good will come of schisms between the nations of Christendom. There is a
posthumous work of Commissioner Lin, in twelve quartos, printed at Peking, urgently pressing
the necessity for China of building upon such schisms the one sole policy that can save her
from ruin.

Next, then, having endeavoured to place these preliminary points in their true light, I will
anticipate the course by which the campaign would naturally be likely to travel, supposing
no alien and mischievous disturbance at work for deranging it. Simply to want fighting allies
would be no very menacing evil. We managed to do without them in our pretty extensive plan
of warfare fifteen years ago; and there is no reason why we should find our difficulties now
more intractable than then. I should imagine that the American Congress and the French Executive
would look on uneasily, and with a sense of shame, at the prospect of sharing largely in commercial
benefits which they had not earned, whilst the burdens of the day were falling exclusively
upon the troops of our nation; but that is a consideration for their own feelings, and may
happen to corrode their hearts and their sense of honour most profoundly at some future time,
when it may have ceased to be remediable. If that were all, for us there would be no arrears
of mortified sensibilities to apprehend. But what is ominous even in relation to ourselves
from these professedly inert associates, these sleeping partners in our Chinese dealings, is,
that their presence with no active functions argues a faith lurking somewhere in the possibility
of talking the Chinese into reason. Such a chimera, still surviving the multiform experience
we have had, augurs ruin to the total enterprise. It is not absolutely impossible that even
Yeh, or any imbecile governor armed with the same obstinacy and brutal arrogance, might, under
the terrors of an armament such as he will have to face, simulate a submission that was far
from his thoughts. We ourselves found in the year 1846, when in fidelity to our engagements
we gave back the important island of Chusan, which we had retained for four years, in fact
until all the instalments of the ransom money had been paid, that a more negligent ear was
turned to our complaints and remonstrances. The vile mob of Canton, long kept and indulged
as so many trained bull-dogs, for the purpose of venting that insolence to Europeans which
the mandarins could no longer utter personally without coming into collision with the treaty,
became gradually unmanageable even by their masters. In 1847 Lord Palmerston, then Foreign
Secretary, was reduced to the necessity of fulminating this passage against the executive government
of the murdering city--'You' (Lord Palmerston was addressing Sir John Davis, at that time H.
M. Plenipotentiary in China) 'will inform the Chinese authorities, in plain and distinct terms,
that the British Government will not tolerate that a Chinese mob shall with impunity maltreat
British subjects in China, whenever they get them into their power; and that if the Chinese
authorities will not punish and prevent such outrages, the British Government will be obliged
to take the matter into their own hands; and it will not be their fault if, in such case, the
innocent are involved in the punishment sought to be inflicted on the guilty.'

This commanding tone was worthy of Lord Palmerston, and in harmony with his public acts in
all cases where he has understood the ground which he occupied. Unhappily he did not understand
the case of Canton. The British were admitted by each successive treaty, their right of entry
was solemnly acknowledged by the emperor. Satisfied with this, Lord Palmerston said, 'Enough:
the principle is secured; the mere details, locally intelligible no doubt, I do not pretend
to understand. But all this will come in time. In time you will be admitted into Canton. And
for the present rest satisfied with having your right admitted, if not as yet your persons.'
Ay, but unfortunately nothing short of plenary admission to British flesh and blood ever will
satisfy the organised ruffians of Canton, that they have not achieved a triumph over the British;
which triumph, as a point still open to doubt amongst mischief-makers, they seek to strengthen
by savage renewal as often as they find a British subject unprotected by armed guardians within
their streets. In those streets murder walks undisguised. And the only measure for grappling
with it is summarily to introduce the British resident, to prostrate all resistance, and to
punish it by the gallows[4] where it proceeds to acts of murder. It is sad consideration for
those, either in England or China, who were nearly or indirectly connected with Canton (amongst
whom must be counted the British Government), that beyond a doubt the murders of our countrymen,
which occurred in that city, would have been intercepted by such a mastery over the local ruffians
as could not be effected so long as the Treaty of Nanking was not carried into effect with
respect to free entrance and residence of British subjects. As things stood, all that Sir J.
Davis could do, in obedience to the directions from the Home Government, was to order a combined
naval and military attack upon all the Chinese forts which belt the approaches to Canton. These
were all captured; and the immense number of eight hundred and twenty-seven heavy guns were
in a few hours made unserviceable, either by knocking off their trunnions, or by spiking them,
or in both ways. The Imperial Commissioner, Keying, previously known so favourably to the English
by his good sense and discretion, had on this occasion thought it his best policy to ignore
Lord Palmerston's letter: a copy had been communicated to him; but he took not the least notice
of it. If this were intended for insolence, it was signally punished within a few hours. It
happened that on our English list of grievances there remained a shocking outrage offered to
Colonel Chesney, a distinguished officer of the engineers,[5] and which to a certainty would
have terminated in his murder, but for the coming up at the critical moment of a Chinese in
high authority. The villains concerned in this outrage were known, were arrested, and (according
to an agreement with our plenipotentiary) were to be punished in our presence. But in contempt
of all his engagements, and out of pure sycophantic concession to the Canton mob, Keying notified
that we the injured party were to be excluded. In that case no punishment at all would have
been inflicted. Luckily, our troops and our shipping had not yet dispersed. Sir J. Davis, therefore,
wrote to Keying, openly taxing him with his breach of honour. 'I was going' [these were Sir
John's words] 'to Hong-Kong to-morrow; but since you behave with evasion and bad faith, in
not punishing the offenders in the presence of deputed officers, I shall keep the troops at
Canton, and proceed to-morrow in the steamer to Foshan, where, if I meet with insult, I will
burn the town.' Foshan is a town in the neighbourhood of Canton, and happened to be the scene
of Colonel Chesney's ill usage. Now, upon this vigorous step, what followed? Hear Sir John:--'Towards
midnight a satisfactory reply was received, and at five o'clock next morning three offenders
were brought to the guard-house--a mandarin of high rank being present on the part of the Chinese,
and deputed officers on the part of the British. The men were bambooed in succession by the
Chinese officers of justice;' and at the close of the scene, the mandarin (upon a requisition
from our side) explained to the mob who crowded about the barriers why the men were punished,
and warned them that similar chastisement for similar offences awaited themselves. In one point
only the example made was unsatisfactory: the men punished were not identified as the same
who had assaulted Colonel Chesney. They might be criminals awaiting punishment for some other
offence. With so shuffling a government as the Chinese, always moving through darkness, and
on the principles of a crooked policy, no perfect satisfaction must ever be looked for. But
still, what a bright contrast between this energy of men acquainted with the Chinese character,
and the foolish imbecility of our own government in Downing Street, who are always attempting
the plan of soothing and propitiating by concession those ignoble Orientals, in whose eyes
all concession, great or small, through the whole scale of graduation, is interpreted as a
distinct confession of weakness. Thus did all our governments: thus, above all others, did
the East India Company for generations deal with the Chinese; and the first act of ours that
ever won respect from China was Anson's broadsides, and the second was our refusal of the ko-tou.
Thus did our Indian Government, in the early stages of their intercourse, deal with the Burmese.
Thus did our government deal with the Japanese--an exaggerated copy of the Chinese. What they
wanted with Japan was simply to do her a very kind and courteous service--namely, to return
safe and sound to their native land seven Japanese who had been driven by hurricanes in continued
succession into the Pacific, and had ultimately been saved from death by British sailors. Our
wise government at home were well aware of the atrocious inhospitality practised systematically
by these cruel islanders; and what course did they take to propitiate them? Good sense would
have prescribed the course of arming the British vessel in so conspicuous a fashion as to inspire
the wholesome respect of fear. Instead of which, our government actually drew the teeth of
the particular vessel selected, by carefully withdrawing each individual gun. The Japanese
cautiously sailed round her, ascertained her powerless condition, and instantly proceeded to
force her away by every mode of insult; nor were the unfortunate Japanese ever restored to
their country. Now, contrast with this endless tissue of imbecilities, practised through many
generations by our blind and obstinate government (for such it really is in its modes of dealing
with Asiatics), the instantaneous success of 'sharp practice' and resolute appeals to fear
on the part of Sir John Davis. By midnight of the same day on which the British remonstrance
had been lodged an answer is received; and this answer, in a perfect rapture of panic, concedes
everything demanded; and by sunrise the next morning the whole affair has been finished. Two
centuries, on our old East Indian system of negotiating with China, would not have arrived
at the same point. Later in the very same year occurred another and more atrocious explosion
of Canton ruffianism; and the instantaneous retribution which followed to the leading criminals,
showed at once how great an advance had been made in winning respect for ourselves, and in
extorting our rights, by this energetic mode of action. On Sunday, the 5th of December, six
British subjects had gone out into the country on a pleasure excursion, some of whom unhappily
carried pocket-pistols. They were attacked by a mob of the usual Canton character; one Chinese
was killed and one wounded by pistol-shots; but of the six British, encompassed by a countless
crowd, not one escaped: all six were murdered, and then thrown into the river. Immediately,
and before the British had time to take any steps, the Chinese authorities were all in motion.
The resolute conduct of Sir John Davis had put an end to the Chinese policy of shuffling, by
making it no longer hopeful. It lost much more than it gained. And accordingly it was agreed,
after a few days' debate, that the emperor's pleasure should not be taken, except upon the
more doubtful cases. Four, about whose guilt no doubts existed, were immediately beheaded;
and the others, after communicating with Peking, were punished in varying degrees--one or two
capitally.

[4] 'By the gallows:'--Or much rather by decapitation. Accordingly, we read of a Ming (i. e.,
native Chinese) emperor, who (upon finding himself in a dreadfully small minority) retired
into his garden with his daughter, and there hanged both himself and the lady. On no account
would he have decapitated either; since in that case the corpses, being headless, would in
Chinese estimation have been imperfect.

[5] 'Colonel Chesney:'--The same, I believe, whose name was at one time so honourably known
in connection with the Euphrates and its steam navigation.

CONDUCT OF THE WAR.

Such is the condition of that guilty town, nearest of all Chinese towns to Hong-Kong, and indissolubly
connected with ourselves. From this town it is that the insults to our flag, and the attempts
at poisoning, wholesale and retail, have collectively emanated; and all under the original
impulse of Yeh. Surely, in speculating on the conduct of the war, either as probable or as
reasonable, the old oracular sentence of Cato the Elder and of the Roman senate (Delenda est
Carthago) begins to murmur in our ears--not in this stern form, but in some modification, better
suited to a merciful religion and to our western civilization. It is a great neglect on the
part of somebody, that we have no account of the baker's trial at Hong-Kong. He was acquitted,
it seems; but upon what ground? Some journals told us that he represented Yeh as coercing him
into this vile attempt, through his natural affection for his family, alleged to be in Yeh's
power at Canton. Such a fact, if true, would furnish some doubtful palliation of the baker's
crime, and might have weight allowed in the sentence; but surely it would place a most dangerous
power in the hands of Chinese grandees, if, through the leverage of families within their grasp,
and by official connivance on our part, they could reach and govern a set of agents in Hong-Kong.
No sympathy with our horror of secret murders by poison, under the shelter of household opportunities,
must be counted on from the emperor, for he has himself largely encouraged, rewarded, and decorated
these claims on his public bounty. The more necessary that such nests of crime as Canton, and
such suggestors of crime as Yeh, should be thoroughly disarmed. This could be done, as regards
the city, by three changes:--First, by utterly destroying the walls and gates; secondly, by
admitting the British to the freest access, and placing their residence in a special quarter,
upon the securest footing; thirdly, and as one chief means in that direction, by establishing
a police on an English plan, and to some extent English in its composition. As to the cost,
it is evident enough that the colonial head-quarters at Hong-Kong must in future keep up a
permanent military establishment; and since any danger threatening this colony must be kindled
and fed chiefly in Canton, why not make this large city, sole focus as it is of all mischief
to us, and not a hundred miles distant from the little island, the main barrack of the armed force?

Upon this world's tariff of international connections, what is China in relation to Great Britain?
Free is she, or not--free to dissolve her connection with us? Secondly, what is Great Britain,
when commercially appraised, in relation to China? Is she of great value or slight value to
China? First, then, concerning China, viewed in its connection with ourselves, this vast (but
perhaps not proportionably populous) country offers by accident the same unique advantage for
meeting a social hiatus in our British system that is offered by certain southern regions in
the American United States for meeting another hiatus within the same British system. Without
tea, without cotton, Great Britain, no longer great, would collapse into a very anomalous sort
of second-rate power. Without cotton, the main bulwark of our export commerce would depart.
And without tea, our daily life would, generally speaking, be as effectually-ruined as bees
without a Flora. In both of these cases it happens that the benefit which we receive is unique;
that is, not merely ranking foremost upon a scale of similar benefits reaped from other lands--a
largest contribution where others might still be large--but standing alone, and in a solitude
that we have always reason to regard as alarming. So that, if Georgia, &c., withdrew from Liverpool
and Manchester her myriads of cotton bales, palsied would be our commercial supremacy; and,
if childish China should refuse her tea (for as to her silk, that is of secondary importance),
we must all go supperless to bed: seriously speaking, the social life of England would receive
a deadly wound. It is certainly a phenomenon without a parallel in the history of social man--that
a great nation, numbering twenty-five millions, after making an allowance on account of those
amongst the very poorest of the Irish who do not use tea, should within one hundred years have
found themselves able so absolutely to revolutionise their diet, as to substitute for the gross
stimulation of ale and wine the most refined, elegant, and intellectual mode of stimulation
that human research has succeeded in discovering.[6] But the material basis of this stimulation
unhappily we draw from the soil of one sole nation--and that nation (are we ever allowed to
forget?) capricious and silly beyond all that human experience could else have suggested as
possible. In these circumstances, it was not to be supposed that we should neglect any opening
that offered for making ourselves independent of a nation which at all times we had so much
reason to distrust as the Chinese. Might not the tea-plant be made to prosper in some district
of our Indian Empire? Forty years ago we began to put forth organised botanical efforts for
settling that question. Forty years ago, and even earlier, according to my remembrance, Dr
Roxburgh--in those days the paramount authority upon oriental botany--threw some energy into
this experiment for creating our own nurseries of the tea-plant. But not until our Burmese
victories, some thirty years since, and our consequent treaties had put the province of Assam
into our power, was, I believe, any serious progress made in this important effort. Mr Fortune
has since applied the benefits of his scientific knowledge, and the results of his own great
personal exertions in the tea districts of China, to the service of this most important speculation;
with what success, I am not able to report. Meantime, it is natural to fear that the very possibility
of doubts hanging over the results in an experiment so vitally national, carries with it desponding
auguries as to the ultimate issue. Were the prospects in any degree cheerful, it would be felt
as a patriotic duty to report at short intervals all solid symptoms of progress made in this
enterprise; for it is an enterprise aiming at a triumph far more than scientific--a triumph
over a secret purpose of the Chinese, full of anti-social malice and insolence against Great
Britain. Of late years, as often as we have accomplished a victory over any insult to our national
honour offered or meditated by the Chinese, they have recurred to some old historical tradition
(perhaps fabulous, perhaps not), of an emperor, Tartar or Chinese, who, rather than submit
to terms of equitable reciprocity in commercial dealings with a foreign nation, or to terms
implying an original equality of the two peoples, caused the whole establishments and machinery
connected with the particular traffic to be destroyed, and all its living agents to be banished
or beheaded. It is certain that, in the contemplation of special contingencies likely to occur
between themselves and the British, the high mandarins dallied at intervals with this ancient
precedent, and forbore to act upon it, partly under the salutary military panic which has for
years been gathering gloomily over their heads, but more imperatively, perhaps, from absolute
inability to dispense with the weekly proceeds from the customs, so eminently dependent upon
the British shipping. Money, mere weight of dollars, the lovely lunar radiance of silver, this
was the spell that moonstruck their mercenary hearts, and kept them for ever see-sawing--

    'Willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike.'

Now, upon this--a state of things suspected at times, or perhaps known, but not so established
as that it could have been afterwards pleaded in evidence--a very grave question arose, but
a question easily settled: had the Chinese a right, under the law of nations, to act upon their
malicious caprice? No man, under any way of viewing the case, hesitated in replying, 'No.'
China, it was argued, had possessed from the first a clear, undoubted right to dismiss us with
our business unaccomplished, re infectâ, if that business were the establishment of a reciprocal
traffic. In the initial stage of the relations between the two powers, the field was open to
any possible movement in either party; but, according to the course which might be severally
pursued on either side, it was possible that one or both should so act as, in the second stage
of their dealings, wilfully to forfeit this original liberty of action. Rate The Sun entered the room shortly after, followed by Aunt Pepa. And finally came, and as the
saying goes, this melon filled the pannier, Currito the Beautiful, accompanied Rosie the tobacconist,
his beautiful sister.

There were no guests came over, because the mayor wanted his gathering was that Night of the most
intimate, exclusive and creamy at the site could imagine. The room, however, shone like a blaze
of gold, because it was lit with three candles magnificent Lucena of four burners each, with some
burning candles in the candlesticks on average cornucopias dozen
beautiful, hung on the walls on the upholstered red damask.

Ray knew the teacher to live and lived with all the pomp and pageantry befitting a man local.
And it is sensed by certain signs and even sniffed and chewed almost, thanks the pleasant whiff of
crass and vapors through passages that came from the kitchen the
room that night there would be no turkey in syrup, and not just refrescanda
but papandina also, the most delicate and expensive.

IV

The teacher Raymond had read quite a few newspapers and some books, starting at several moral
and political sciences, and especially in a brand new, that includes most, and called Sociology. But
why not presumed speaker, wise man or advice. His pride was estimated to be a man of action and
completely practical. I make sure not to he had read the Essays of Lord Macaulay, but I think
there are of them Spanish version; but if I had not read, his merit was greater, as agreed with
the noble Lord positivist one of its most unique thoughts. Seneca had made an eloquent speech
against anger, which to no avail, as no one knows a subject that has ceased get angry and make a thousand
atrocities, and convinced by the arguments corrected Seneca. And as we do not know that anyone
has gone without shoes made them a shoemaker, and the Lord as the master Raymond inferred, with
judicious dialectic, which is more useful than Seneca, in every human society, the humblest
of shoemakers.

The teacher Raymond, by Thus, as was or had been a shoemaker and was ever humble, is estimated
at more than Seneca, especially with regard to utility and art of life.

Or seemed to despise despised oratory, but without realizing it, and letting snatch of his convictions,
speeches We often missed, though, rather than flowers, vigorous and
brief.

Now look at Currito told the Beautiful, being present other persons who have listed:

- Your way to proceed, Currito friend, I have had enough, and as I am mayor I will not consent
continue. Nobody has been charged with monitoring and girls and to zeal to paper knife in hand,
Cato Censorinus. You know that I belong to the Liberal Party, which like now granted autonomy
and several overseas provinces. Consider, then, if not want to get angry, your sister and
my lady Dona Rosita Marcela, and let them autonomous, ie completely free to do whatever they
want. Only in this way and not through violence, fear or guardianship constant real merit
will shine upon them the strength and persistence that retain their immaculate virtue, defending it from
all attacks and wiles of heartthrobs seductive. If they really want that no contraband in their
domains matute or not it is necessary that you be afraid, or to kill the smugglers and smugglers.
Y if they want to be contraband or even kill him matute dozens to smugglers and traffickers. There
can be kept to a woman says I do not know how wise, and with good reason to what understand.
In sum, while the wise man was right and neither am I, I have here the authority and strength,
which in this case more important than reason, and I declare that if you continue intimidating
people, I do not scare me, and drench you, and if I insist I send
to Ceuta or Melilla look there for your courage killing Moors.

If you're so brave, why do not you go to Cuba Philippines or to scare and defeat the rebels rather
than frighten the peaceful neighborhood I government now?

- I, a teacher, I am well here and cursed the wins that I have to
go to Cuba or the Philippines.

With so do not you threaten me, they will try and make amends.

All my fury is penilla blame black, and black penilla in my heart, well I know I who have
fault.

Here Dona Ramona intervened and said:

- Hey, brother, let's sermons have come here not to lecture but to amuse. Curro already been
amended and will be softer than a glove.

D. Antonio, you strum that guitar and that these girls dance the fandango. Currito has a good
voice and style and sing the best songs.

    
    
    It was not necessary to say more.
    The organist played a fandango loud.

Rosita Doña Marcela and danced with grace and elegance, clattering castanets.

The teacher Raymond, Aunt Ramona Doña Pepa and clapped.

It was such a din put together that it appeared that there had been seven but seven hundred people.

When
stopped clapping and castanets and guitar just sounded, a voice sang Currito sentimental and
soft the following couplet:

Tie me to a hair sticks to your bed, and although the hair to break there is no fear that I
go.

Currito showed such a loving inspiration to sing and looked with eyes as sheep dying medium Dona
Ramona, who was sitting near him, Dona Ramona was right not to be dominated by more time; felt
until melted and vaporized the ice of their disdain, and, discarding their purpose of casting rolling
resistance and to some extent his lordly and masterful restraint,
he said to Currito:

- Come on, man, if the order has to be, I do
not molerte more.

Better is to ashamed to face undefiled in heart. Do not tie it with a hair, but I'll tie you
to this thread, wool that, without you only knew, I was making socks
and thinking of you, ingratón, fugitive, driven!

Ramona then pulled the pocket of her apron a huge ball of brown wool,
there was, unwrapped a couple of yards, made a noose and threw Currito
taking him by the neck and holding him at the other end as a flange.

They welcomed everyone to the end, the teacher had made man and applauded even more than under
further statements and promises of Currito, be recognized and there
proclaim autonomy Dona Rosita and Marcela.

To solemnize, both girls danced with remarkable sevillanas panache and expertise.

Three damsels, bondage master Raymond, the three very neat and graceful served after dinner in
the adjoining dining room.

Villalegre are still living in old-fashioned. All the villagers ate the soup off and stew for
two in the afternoon. Was not surprising, therefore, that participants in the gathering they
had hearty appetite at about eleven o'clock at night they served dinner.

It was marinated pork preserved in lard, like liquid rubies by the red color lent him the dressing.
There was also roast turkey and anchovies, fine wine of Moriles and, for dessert, fruit and
Piñonate. Finally, as an appendix and supplement of such a sumptuous feast, chocolate pastries,
macaroons and biscuits.

The feast was even more elated and happy that delicious and lasted until two am.

As a farewell, wished the teacher Raymond put the appropriate stamp and give strength to there
had been concluded.

Imposed silence and spoke thus:

- I have in Chinchón a good friend, called D. Arturo Gonzalez, who is so deep sociologist and business
manufacturer or grower double aniseed spirits.

This product I sent him some bottles, in which label, now called tag, is read amazement Sociological
Spirit or liquid-altruistic. I wanted to compete with my friend D. Arthur and without stealing
his trademark aniseed spirits have done twice as well, which is so altruistic and has a spirit as sociological
as yours. These girls bring in individual trays drinks and spirits and Chinchón Villalegre. Each
of us will drink two glasses, one of each class, tell you what you like best, and then provide well
for the future consortium My sister and Currito the Beautiful, as
the glorious full autonomy and freedom of Rosita and Dona Marcela.

In effect, brought the brandy, and each drank two glasses. The opinions were divided. There Chinchón who
voted and who voted for Villalegre there, but as everyone drank at least second glass of brandy which
he thought best, the result came to be that went to three or four cups apiece.

Everything was then joy and mutual affection, and proved that both were altruistic spirits and
were endowed with equal spirit sociological.

Then the courtier D. Raymond, thanks to several clear indications, he soon convinced that under Dona
Marcela was not anything to write home or independently, or without autonomy.

A few days later, he returned D. Raimundo the court, now convinced
that the innocent idylls no easier than it in the most rustic and
remote locations.

In court he forgot Dona Marcela soon, took aim at excelling as politician, managed to escape deputy
and who says there is a man of great promise, it will become Director General, Ambassador or
Minister, and after the Spanish government, or when the papal grant him the title Conde de Bevel
or Hormabella.

Doña Marcela, recognizing that Villalegre is petty grounds for their expansions and purposes
Price has gone to his country, and from Tarifa past Gibraltar, which may recapture right. The
truth is that as the Scipio and other heroes of ancient Rome, surnamed Africanus, the Numantino,
the British and Germanic, as the city that had taken or as a nation
that had subjugated her, still never be the sun in Tarifa, the surname
of Gibraltar, and as such is known and held in the five parts of the
world.

Rosita has distinguished itself and has prospered since it is less independent, but not asleep
into the straw.

Keep up the tobacco and snuff buy, even those who did not smoke before,
and smoke, and Tabacalera Villalegre done in double or triple business.

By buying stamps villalegrino mail is not to write more letters today he used to write. And finally,
Rosita sells both stamped paper which is wonderful. To explain it rationally, there are those who
is considered certain that she does not receive or accept any loving statement if it is not written
in folios of the peseta.

Dona Ramona and Currito meantime, having become a teacher, are becoming more adventurous and
prosper corambres making and selling a lot. We do not know how he composed Currito, but the fact
is fish that never knows the wine is poured into their skins, which makes all handsome boots, and
also builds another kind of naked very especially designed to carry oil in them to the Alpujarras,
mangurrinos because, as they call in the Alpujarra Villalegre not produce oil. Produce honey
instead of cane sugar or raw honey which fill the bottles in the carriers leading oil and bring it
to the province of Cordoba. This honey delights Cordovan the greedy local women, who take
the pulse dish bits soaking in it bread, and looking like the pretty
hands with fingers engarabitados as cockscomb.

I am unable to decide what moral lesson can be drawn, or what argument can be proved, in view of
events that have referred. Shall I say simply, that everyone take the moral lesson or prove
the thesis that it wants, or does not take moral lesson or test any thesis, so is not reading my
nag too.

TWO JAPANESE STORY

My brother the Hon. D. José Delavat, as Minister of Spain in Japan,
had the good idea to send me there, by mail, a cute and curious mind.

Consists of twelve little volumes, printed on paper so rare, that looks more like fabric than
paper, and many beautiful paintings in the text. The painting is much more than what is written, and
is painted with great originality and grace.

If it were written in Japanese, I would stay with the desire to understand, because I do not
know word of the language spoken or written in Japan. I only know that the Japanese have many
books, and some of them, mostly novels are translated in several
European languages, particularly English, French and German.

For this, the twelve little volumes or notebooks I have, but printed and painted in Tokyo, in English,
and are stories for children, so that Japanese children learn English.

It seems that these stories quite popular, is taken word for word from the mouths of Japanese
nurses; and must be so because the innocence of the narration reveals the clear.

I have liked both these accounts not resist the temptation to put
a pair of them in Castilian.

I choose the two that I find most interesting one because it differs a lot of almost all European
vulgar tales, and other so much that resembles certain Christian
legends, such as San Amaro, the other saint, referred to by the Father
Arbiol in their Desengaños mystics, and has put in verse the American
poet Longfellow in his Golden Legend.

Without further introduction go beyond the stories.

THE MIRROR OF MATSUYAMA

Much time has lived two young couples in secluded, rustic place.

They had a daughter and they loved her with all my heart. I will not say the names of husband
and wife, which fell oblivion, but I will say that the place they
lived was called Matsuyama, in the province of Echigo.

There were to happen, when she was still very tiny, the father was forced to go to the big
city, capital of the Empire. As so far, neither the mother nor the child could accompany him and
he was just saying goodbye and promising to bring them to the back,
very nice gifts.

The mother had never been beyond the nearest village, and thus could not throw some fear considering
that her husband undertook the long journey, but at the same time
I felt proud satisfaction that it was he, for all those contours,
the first man who went to the rich city, where the king and the magnates
lived, and where there was to see so many beauties and wonders.

Finally, when he learned the woman who became her husband, the girl dressed in full dress, as
best he could, and she wore a beautiful blue suit that he knew that he liked in the extreme.

Increase
the cost could not quite happy with this good woman when she saw her husband return home safe
and safe. The little one was clapping and smiling with delight at
seeing his father toys brought.

And he did not have enough of the extraordinary things he had seen during the pilgrimage, and
the capital itself.

- To you - told his wife - I have brought a strange object of merit called mirror. Look at him
and tell me what you see inside.

Then gave a flat box of white wood, where, when he opened it, found a metal disk. On one side
was white and matte silver, with ornaments in relief of birds and flowers, and on the other,
bright and slick as glass.

They looked at the young bride with pleasure and wonder, because from its depth was looking at
her with parted lips and eyes animated a face cheerful smile.

- What do you see? - Asked the husband loved the astonishment of her and very proud to show
that there learned anything during his absence.

- I see a pretty girl, who looks at me and moves his lips as if speaking,
and carrying case strange! a blue dress, exactly like mine.

- Silly,
it's your own face I see, - he said the man, very satisfied to know
something that his wife did not know .-- This circle of metal is called
mirror.

In the city everyone has one, but us, here in the country, we have not seen yet.

Women Pleased with this, he spent several days looking at every moment,
because, as I said, was the first time I saw a mirror, and therefore
the image of pretty face.

It found, however, that such prodigious jewelry had on prices for
used daily, and kept in its box and carefully concealed between your
dearest treasures.

Years passed, and even husband and wife lived very happily.

The spell of his life was the girl it grew and was the spitting image
of his mother, and so loving and good that everyone loved.

Thinking mother in their own passenger vanity, to be so beautiful,
he kept hidden the mirror, fearing that its use would pamper the child.

As never spoke of the mirror, father forgot everything. Thus grew up the girl so simple and innocent
as had been his mother, ignoring her own beauty, and that reflected the mirror.

But there came a tremendous day misfortune came to this family until
then so happy.

The excellent and loving mother fell ill, and although the daughter
nursed with tender affection and attentive wakefulness, it was getting
worse and worse, until there was hope, but death.

When she knew that was soon to leave her husband and her daughter was very sad, grieve for those
left on earth and especially for girls.

Called, then, and said:

- Dear child, you see I am very sick and soon I will die and leave you alone you and your beloved
father. When I go away, promise me you'll look in the mirror, all days, upon waking and at
bedtime. In it I see and know that I am always looking out for you.

With these words, he showed the place where he was hiding the mirror. The girl promised to tears
what her mother called, and she, calm and resigned, was terminated
recently.

Thereafter, the obedient and virtuous girl never forgot the precept mother, and every morning and
every evening took place in the mirror that was hidden, and looked at him for a long time intensely.
There he saw the face of his lost mother, bright and smiling. There was pale and sick and in
his last days, but beautiful and young. She confided her troubles night and sorrows of the
day, and she, on waking, encouragement and affection sought to fulfill
their duties.

In this way the child lived, as monitored by his mother, trying to please her in everything as
when he lived, and always taking care not to do anything that would grieve her or make her
angry. Its content was pure look in the mirror and say:

- Mother, today I was like you want me to be.

Said Father, after all, that the girl looked blameless in the mirror every morning and night
and it seemed like talking to him.

Then he asked the cause of this strange behavior.

The girl replied:

- Father, every day I look in the mirror to see
my dear mother and talk to her.

He also noted the desire of his dying
mother that she had never ceased to fulfill it. 

Touched by so simply
and so faithful and loving obedience, he shed tears of pity and affection,
and never had the heart to discover her daughter to the image he saw
in the mirror was the transcript of His own sweet figure, the powerful
and tender bond of filial love increasingly similar to that of his
late mother.

THE PESCADORCITO Urashima

LIVED long time ago in the
Japan Sea coast, a pescadorcito called Urashima, nice guy and very
smart with the rod and hook.

One day out fishing in his boat, but
instead of catching a fish, what do you think he picked? Well, took
a big turtle with a shell very strong and an old face, wrinkled and
ugly and a rare corner. Well, I better know one thing, that will no
doubt know, is that the turtles live a thousand years at least the
living Japanese.

Urashima, who did not know he said to himself:

-
A fish knows me so well for lunch and perhaps better than the turtle.
What I have to kill this poor animal and depriving him of still living
nine hundred ninety-nine years? No, no want to be so cruel. I am sure
that my mother will approve what I do.

And indeed, took the turtle
back into the sea.

Urashima happened shortly after that he slept
in his boat. It was very hot weather of summer, when almost no one
is resisting at noon to take a nap.

Just fell asleep, left the wave
within a beautiful lady who got into the boat and said:

- I am the
daughter of the god of the sea and live with my father in the Dragon
Palace, beyond the seas. It was not you caught the little turtle has,
and so generously put back into the water instead of killing. I myself
was sent by my father, the god of the sea, to see if you were good
or bad. Now, as we know you're good, a great kid, that repels all
cruelty, I have come to take me. If you want, get married and live
happily Together, over a thousand years in the Dragon Palace, beyond
the blue seas.

Urashima then took a paddle and other Marine Princess,
and rowed, rowed, arriving Finally the Dragon Palace, where the god
of the sea lived and reigned as king over all the dragons, turtles
and fish. Oh that was this site so enjoyable! The walls of the Palace
were of coral trees leaves were emeralds, and rubies per fruit, scales
the fish were silver, and the tails of dragons, gold. Think of all
the most beautiful, gorgeous and shining you saw in your life, put
together, and maybe then conceive what the Palace appeared. And all
this belonged to Urashima. And why not, if he was the son of the god
of the sea and the husband of the lovely Princess?

They lived happy
for more than three years, every day walking among the trees with
leaves of emeralds and rubies fruit.

But one morning his wife said
Urashima:

- Very happy and pleased I am here. Need, however, go home
and see my father, my mother, my brothers and my sisters. Let me go
for a short time and soon return. And his friend Titus, therefore, simply
as the brother of Domitian, simply as a Flavian, he affected to regard as indirectly providing
a wife, when he urged his friend by marrying to enrol himself as a pillagee elect.

The latter jest, therefore, when once apprehended, speaks broadly and bitingly for itself.
But the other--what can it possibly mean? For centuries has that question been reiterated;
and hitherto without advancing by one step nearer to solution. Isaac Casaubon, who about 230
years since was the leading oracle in this field of literature, writing an elaborate and continuous
commentary upon Suetonius, found himself unable to suggest any real aids for dispersing the
thick darkness overhanging the passage. What he says is this:--'Parum satisfaciunt mihi interpretes
in explicatione hujus Lamiæ dicti. Nam quod putant Heu taceo suspirium esse ejus--indicem doloris
ob abductam uxorem magni sed latentis, nobis non ita videtur; sed notatam potius fuisse tyrannidem
principis, qui omnia in suo genere pulchra et excellentia possessoribus eriperet, unde necessitas
incumbebat sua bona dissimulandi celandique.' Not at all satisfactory to me are the commentators
in the explanation of the dictum (which is here equivalent to dicterium) of Lamia. For, whereas
they imagine Heu taceo to be a sigh of his--the record and indication of a sorrow, great though
concealed, on behalf of the wife that had been violently torn away from him--me, I confess,
that the case does not strike in that light; but rather that a satiric blow was aimed at the
despotism of the sovereign prince, who tore away from their possessors all objects whatsoever
marked by beauty or distinguished merit in their own peculiar class: whence arose a pressure
of necessity for dissembling and hiding their own advantages. 'Sic esse exponendum,' that such
is the true interpretation (continues Casaubon), 'docent illa verba [LAUDANTI VOCEM SUAM],'
(we are instructed by those words), [to one who praised his singing voice, &c.].

This commentary was obscure enough, and did no honour to the native good sense of Isaac Casaubon,
usually so conspicuous. For, whilst proclaiming a settlement, in reality it settled nothing.
Naturally, it made but a feeble impression upon the scholars of the day; and not long after
the publication of the book, Casaubon received from Joseph Scaliger a friendly but gasconading
letter, in which that great scholar brought forward a new reading--namely, [Greek: entaktô],
to which he assigned a profound technical value as a musical term. No person even affected
to understand Scaliger. Casaubon himself, while treating so celebrated a man with kind and
considerate deference, yet frankly owned that, in all his vast reading, he had never met with
this strange Greek word. But, without entering into any dispute upon that verbal question,
and conceding to Scaliger the word and his own interpretation of the word, no man could understand
in what way this new resource was meant to affect the ultimate question at issue--namely, the
extrication of the passage from that thick darkness which overshadowed it.

'As you were' (to speak in the phraseology of military drill), was in effect the word of command.
All things reverted to their original condition. And two centuries of darkness again enveloped
this famous perplexity of Roman literature. The darkness had for a few moments seemed to be
unsettling itself in preparation for flight: but immediately it rolled back again; and through
seven generations of men this darkness was heavier, because less hopeful than before.

Now then, I believe, all things are ready for the explosion of the catastrophe; 'which catastrophe,'
I hear some malicious reader whispering, 'is doubtless destined to glorify himself' (meaning
the unworthy writer of this little paper). I cannot deny it. A truth is a truth. And, since
no medal, nor riband, nor cross, of any known order, is disposable for the most brilliant successes
in dealing with desperate (or what may be called condemned) passages in Pagan literature, mere
sloughs of despond that yawn across the pages of many a heathen dog, poet and orator, that
I could mention, the more reasonable it is that a large allowance should be served out of boasting
and self-glorification to all those whose merits upon this field national governments have
neglected to proclaim. The Scaligers, both father and son, I believe, acted upon this doctrine;
and drew largely by anticipation upon that reversionary bank which they conceived to be answerable
for such drafts. Joseph Scaliger, it strikes me, was drunk when he wrote his letter on the
present occasion, and in that way failed to see (what Casaubon saw clearly enough) that he
had commenced shouting before he was out of the wood. For my own part, if I go so far as to
say that the result promises, in the Frenchman's phrase, to 'cover me with glory,' I beg the
reader to remember that the idea of 'covering' is of most variable extent: the glory may envelope
one in a voluminous robe--a princely mantle that may require a long suite of train-bearers,
or may pinch and vice one's arms into that succinct garment (now superannuated) which some
eighty years ago drew its name from the distinguished Whig family in England of Spencer. Anticipating,
therefore, that I shall--nay, insisting, and mutinously, if needful, that I will--be covered
with glory by the approaching result, I do not contemplate anything beyond that truncated tunic,
once known as a 'spencer,' and which is understood to cover only the shoulders and the chest.

Now, then, all being ready, and the arena being cleared of competitors (for I suppose it is
fully understood that everybody but myself has retired from the contest), thrice, in fact,
has the trumpet sounded, 'Do you give it up?' Some preparations there are to be made in all
cases of contest. Meantime, let it be clearly understood what it is that the contest turns
upon. Supposing that one had been called, like OEdipus of old, to a turn-up with that venerable
girl the Sphinx, most essential it would have been that the clerk of the course (or however
you designate the judge, the umpire, &c.) should have read the riddle propounded to Greece:
how else judge of the solution? At present the elements of the case to be decided stand thus:--

A Roman noble, a man, in fact, of senatorial rank, has been robbed, robbed with violence, and
with cruel scorn, of a lovely young wife, to whom he was most tenderly attached. But by whom?
the indignant reader demands. By a younger son[8] of the Roman emperor Vespasian.

[8] But holding what rank, and what precise station, at the time of the outrage? At this point
I acknowledge a difficulty. The criminal was in this case Domitian, the younger son of Vespasian,
the tenth Cæsar, younger Brother of Titus, the eleventh Cæsar, and himself, under the name
of Domitian, the twelfth of the Cæsars, consequently the closing prince in that series of the
initial twelve Cæsars whom Suetonius had undertaken to record. Now the difficulty lies here,
which yet I have never seen noticed in any book: was this violence perpetrated before or after
Domitian's assumption of the purple? If after, how, then, could the injured husband have received
that advice from Titus (as to repairing his loss by a second marriage), which forms part of
an anecdote and a bon-mot between Titus and Lamia? Yet again, if not after but before, how
was it Lamia had not invoked the protection of Vespasian, or of Titus--the latter of whom enjoyed
a theatrically fine reputation for equity and moderation?

For some years the wrong has been borne in silence: the sufferer knew himself to be powerless
as against such an oppressor; and that to show symptoms of impotent hatred was but to call
down thunderbolts upon his own head. Generally, therefore, prudence had guided him. Patience
had been the word; silence, and below all the deep, deep word--wait; and if by accident he
were a Christian, not only that same word wait would have been heard, but this beside, look
under the altars for others that also wait. But poor suffering patience, sense of indignity
that is hopeless, must (in order to endure) have saintly resources. Infinite might be the endurance,
if sustained only by a finite hope. But the black despairing darkness that revealed a tossing
sea self-tormented and fighting with chaos, showing neither torch that glimmered in the foreground,
nor star that kept alive a promise in the distance, violently refused to be comforted. It is
beside an awful aggravation of such afflictions, that the lady herself might have co-operated
in the later stages of the tragedy with the purposes of the imperial ruffian. Lamia had been
suffered to live, because as a living man he yielded up into the hands of his tormentor his
whole capacity of suffering; no part of it escaped the hellish range of his enemy's eye. But
this advantage for the torturer had also its weak and doubtful side. Use and monotony might
secretly be wearing away the edge of the organs on and through which the corrosion of the inner
heart proceeded. On the whole, therefore, putting together the facts of the case, it seems
to have been resolved that he should die. But previously that he should drink off a final cup
of anguish, the bitterest that had yet been offered. The lady herself, again--that wife so
known historically, so notorious, yet so total a stranger to man and his generations--had she
also suffered in sympathy with her martyred husband? That must have been known to a certainty
in the outset of the case, by him that knew too profoundly on what terms of love they had lived.
But at length, seeking for crowning torments, it may have been that the dreadful Cæsar might
have found the 'raw' in his poor victim, that offered its fellowship in exalting the furnace
of misery. The lady herself--may we not suppose her at the last to have given way before the
strengthening storm. Possibly to resist indefinitely might have menaced herself with ruin,
whilst offering no benefit to her husband. And, again, though killing to the natural interests
which accompany such a case, might not the lady herself be worn out, if no otherwise, by the
killing nature of the contest? There is besides this dreadful fact, placed ten thousand times
on record, that the very goodness of the human heart in such a case ministers fuel to the moral
degradation of a female combatant. Any woman, and exactly in proportion to the moral sensibility
of her nature, finds it painful to live in the same house with a man not odiously repulsive
in manners or in person on terms of eternal hostility. In a community so nobly released as
was Rome from all base Oriental bondage of women, this followed--that compliances of a nature
oftentimes to belie the native nobility of woman become painfully liable to misinterpretation.
Possibly under the blinding delusion of secret promises, unknown, nay, inaccessible, to those
outside (all contemporaries being as ridiculously impotent to penetrate within the curtain
as all posterity), the wife of Lamia, once so pure, may have been over-persuaded to make such
public manifestations of affection for Domitian as had hitherto, upon one motive or another,
been loftily withheld. Things, that to a lover carry along with them irreversible ruin, carry
with them final desolation of heart, are to the vast current of ordinary men, who regard society
exclusively from a political centre, less than nothing. Do they deny the existence of other
and nobler agencies in human affairs? Not at all. Readily they confess these agencies: but,
as movements obeying laws not known, or imperfectly known to them, these they ignore. What
it was circumstantially that passed, long since has been overtaken and swallowed up by the
vast oblivions of time. This only survives--namely, that what he said gave signal offence in
the highest quarter, and that his death followed. But what was it that he did say? That is
precisely the question, and the whole question which we have to answer. At present we know,
and we do not know, what it was that he said. We have bequeathed to us by history two words--involving
eight letters--which in their present form, with submission to certain grandees of classic
literature, mean exactly nothing. These two words must be regarded as the raw material upon
which we have to work: and out of these we are required to turn out a rational saying for Aelius
Lamia, under the following five conditions:--First, it must allude to his wife, as one that
is lost to him irrecoverably; secondly, it must glance at a gloomy tyrant who bars him from
rejoining her; thirdly, it must reply to the compliment which had been paid to the sweetness
of his own voice; fourthly, it should in strictness contain some allusion calculated not only
to irritate, but even to alarm or threaten his jealous and vigilant enemy; fifthly, doing all
these things, it ought also to absorb, as its own main elements, the eight letters contained
in the present senseless words--'Heu taceo.'

Here is a monstrous quantity of work to throw upon any two words in any possible language.
Even Shakspere's clown,[9] when challenged to furnish a catholic answer applicable to all conceivable
occasions, cannot do it in less than nine letters--namely, Oh lord, sir. I, for my part, satisfied
that the existing form of Heu taceo was mere indictable and punishable nonsense, but yet that
this nonsense must enter as chief element into the stinging sense of Lamia, gazed for I cannot
tell how many weeks at these impregnable letters, viewing them sometimes as a fortress that
I was called upon to escalade, sometimes as an anagram that I was called upon to re-organise
into the life which it had lost through some dislocation of arrangement. Finally the result
in which I landed, and which fulfilled all the conditions laid down was this:--Let me premise,
however, what at any rate the existing darkness attests, that some disturbance of the text
must in some way have arisen; whether from the gnawing of a rat, or the spilling of some obliterating
fluid at this point of some critical or unique MS. It is sufficient for us that the vital word
has survived. I suppose, therefore, that Lamia had replied to the friend who praised the sweetness
of his voice, 'Sweet is it? Ah, would to Heaven it might prove Orpheutic.' Ominous in this
case would be the word Orpheutic to the ears of Domitian: for every school-boy knows that this
means a wife-revoking voice. But first let me remark that there is such a legitimate word as
Orpheutaceam: and in that case the Latin repartee of Lamia would stand thus--Suavem dixisti?
Quam vellem et Orpheutaceam. But, perhaps, reader, you fail to recognise in this form our old
friend Heu taceo. But here he is to a certainty, in spite of the rat: and in a different form
of letters the compositor will show him, up to you as--vellem et Orp. [HEU TACEAM]. Possibly,
being in good humour, you will be disposed to wink at the seemingly surreptitious AM, though
believing the real word to be taceo. Let me say, therefore, that one reading, I believe, gives
taceam. Here, then, shines out at once--(1) Eurydice the lovely wife; (2) detained by the gloomy
tyrant Pluto; (3) who, however, is forced into surrendering her to her husband, whose voice
(the sweetest ever known) drew stocks and stones to follow him, and finally his wife; (4) the
word Orpheutic involves an alarming threat, showing that the hope of recovering the lady still
survived; (5) we have involved in the restoration all the eight, or perhaps nine, letters of
the erroneous form.

[9] In All's Well that Ends Well.

HOW TO WRITE ENGLISH.[10]

Among world-wide objects of speculation, objects rising to the dignity of a mundane or cosmopolitish
value, which challenge at this time more than ever a growing intellectual interest, is the
English language. Why particularly at this time? Simply, because the interest in that language
rests upon two separate foundations: there are two separate principles concerned in its pretensions;
and by accident in part, but in part also through the silent and inevitable march of human
progress, there has been steadily gathering for many years an interest of something like sceptical
and hostile curiosity about each of these principles, considered as problems open to variable
solutions, as problems already viewed from different national centres, and as problems also
that press forward to some solution or other with more and more of a clamorous emphasis, in
proportion as they tend to consequences no longer merely speculative and scholastic, but which
more and more reveal features largely practical and political. The two principles upon which
the English language rests the burden of its paramount interest, are these:--first, its powers,
the range of its endowments; secondly, its apparent destiny. Some subtle judges in this field
of criticism are of opinion, and ever had that opinion, that amongst the modern languages which
originally had compass enough of strength and opulence in their structure, or had received
culture sufficient to qualify them plausibly for entering the arena of such a competition,
the English had certain peculiar and inappreciable aptitudes for the highest offices of interpretation.
Twenty-five centuries ago, this beautiful little planet on which we live might be said to have
assembled and opened her first parliament for representing the grandeur of the human intellect.
That particular assembly, I mean, for celebrating the Olympic Games about four centuries and
a half before the era of Christ, when Herodotus opened the gates of morning for the undying
career of history, by reading to the congregated children of Hellas, to the whole representative
family of civilisation, that loveliest of earthly narratives, which, in nine musical cantos,
unfolded the whole luxury of human romance as at the bar of some austere historic Areopagus,
and, inversely again, which crowded the total abstract of human records, sealed[11] as with
the seal of Delphi in the luxurious pavilions of human romance.

[10] This fragment appeared in The Instructor for July, 1853. The subject was not continued
in any form.--H.

[11] 'Sealed,' &c.:--I do not believe that, in the sense of holy conscientious loyalty to his
own innermost convictions, any writer of history in any period of time can have surpassed Herodotus.
And the reader must remember (or, if unlearned, he must be informed) that this judgment has
now become the unanimous judgment of all the most competent authorities--that is, of all those
who, having first of all the requisite erudition as to Greek, as to classical archæology, &c.,
then subsequently applied this appropriate learning to the searching investigation of the several
narratives authorised by Herodotus. In the middle of the last century, nothing could rank lower
than the historic credibility of this writer. And to parody his title to be regarded as the
'Father of History,' by calling him the 'Father of Lies,' was an unworthy insult offered to
his admirable simplicity and candour by more critics than one. But two points startle the honourable
reader, who is loathe to believe of any laborious provider for a great intellectual interest
that he can deliberately have meant to deceive: the first point, and, separately by itself,
an all-sufficient demur, is this--that, not in proportion to the learning and profundity brought
to bear upon Herodotus, did the doubts and scruples upon his fidelity strengthen or multiply.
Precisely in the opposite current was the movement of human opinion, as it applied itself to
this patriarch of history. Exactly as critics and investigators arose like Larcher--just, reasonable,
thoughtful, patient, and combining--or geographers as comprehensive and as accurate as Major
Rennel, regularly in that ratio did the reports and the judgments of Herodotus command more
and more respect. The other point is this; and, when it is closely considered, it furnishes
a most reasonable ground of demur to the ordinary criticisms upon Herodotus. These criticisms
build the principle of their objection generally upon the marvellous or romantic element which
intermingles with the current of the narrative. But when a writer treats (as to Herodotus it
happened that repeatedly he treated) tracts of history far removed in space and in time from
the domestic interests of his native land, naturally he misses as any available guide the ordinary
utilitarian relations which would else connect persons and events with great outstanding interests
of his own contemporary system. The very abstraction which has silently been performed by the
mere effect of vast distances, wildernesses that swallow up armies, and mighty rivers that
are unbridged, together with the indefinite chronological remoteness, do already of themselves
translate such sequestered and insulated chambers of history into the character of moral apologues,
where the sole surviving interest lies in the quality of the particular moral illustrated,
or in the sudden and tragic change of fortune recorded. Such changes, it is urged, are of rare
occurrence; and, recurring too often, they impress a character of suspicious accuracy upon
the narrative. Doubtless they do so, and reasonably, where the writer is pursuing the torpid
current of circumstantial domestic annals. But, in the rapid abstract of Herodotus, where a
century yields but a page or two, and considering that two slender octavos, on the particular
scale adopted by Herodotus, embody the total records of the human race down to his own epoch,
really it would furnish no legitimate ground of scruple or jealousy, though every paragraph
should present us with a character that seems exaggerated, or with an incident approaching
to the marvellous, or a catastrophe that is revolting. A writer is bound--he has created it
into a duty, having once assumed the office of a national historiographer--to select from the
rolls of a nation such events as are the most striking. And a selection conducted on this principle
through several centuries, or pursuing the fortunes of a dynasty reigning over vast populations,
must end in accumulating a harvest of results such as would startle the sobriety of ordinary
historic faith. If a medical writer should elect for himself, of his own free choice, to record
such cases only in his hospital experience as terminated fatally, it would be absurd to object
the gloomy tenor of his reports as an argument for suspecting their accuracy, since he himself,
by introducing this as a condition into the very terms of his original undertaking with the
public, has created against himself the painful necessity of continually distressing the sensibilities
of his reader. To complain of Herodotus, or any public historian, as drawing too continually
upon his reader's profounder sensibilities, is, in reality, to forget that this belongs as
an original element to the very task which he has undertaken. To undertake the exhibition of
human life under those aspects which confessedly bring it into unusual conflict with chance
and change, is, by a mere self-created necessity, to prepare beforehand the summons to a continued
series of agitations: it is to seek the tragic and the wondrous wilfully, and then to complain
of it as violating the laws of probability founded on life within the ordinary conditions of
experience.

That most memorable of Panhellenic festivals it was, which first made known to each other the
two houses of Grecian blood that typified its ultimate and polar capacities, the most and the
least of exorbitations, the utmost that were possible from its equatorial centre; viz., on
the one side, the Asiatic Ionian, who spoke the sweet musical dialect of Homer, and, on the
other side, the austere Dorian, whom ten centuries could not teach that human life brought
with it any pleasure, or any business, or any holiness of duty, other or loftier than that
of war. If it were possible that, under the amenities of a Grecian sky, too fierce a memento
could whisper itself of torrid zones, under the stern discipline of the Doric Spartan it was
that you looked for it; or, on the other hand, if the lute might, at intervals, be heard or
fancied warbling too effeminately for the martial European key of the Grecian muses, amidst
the sweet blandishments it was of Ionian groves that you arrested the initial elements of such
a relaxing modulation. Twenty-five centuries ago, when Europe and Asia met for brotherly participation
in the noblest, perhaps,[12] of all recorded solemnities, viz., the inauguration of History
in its very earliest and prelusive page, the coronation (as with propriety we may call it)
of the earliest (perhaps even yet the greatest?) historic artist, what was the language employed
as the instrument of so great a federal act? It was that divine Grecian language to which,
on the model of the old differential compromise in favour of Themistocles, all rival languages
would cordially have conceded the second honour. If now, which is not impossible, any occasion
should arise for a modern congress of the leading nations that represent civilisation, not
probably in the Isthmus of Corinth, but on that of Darien, it would be a matter of mere necessity,
and so far hardly implying any expression of homage, that the English language should take
the station formerly accorded to the Grecian. But I come back to the thesis which I announced,
viz., to the twofold onus which the English language is called upon to sustain:--first, to
the responsibility attached to its powers; secondly, to the responsibility and weight of expectation
attached to its destiny. To the questions growing out of the first, I will presently return.
But for the moment, I will address myself to the nature of that DESTINY, which is often assigned
to the English language: what is it? and how far is it in a fair way of fulfilling this destiny?

[12] Perhaps, seriously, the most of a cosmopolitical act that has ever been attempted. Next
to it, in point of dignity, I should feel disposed to class the inauguration of the Crusades.

As early as the middle of the last century, and by people with as little enthusiasm as David
Hume, it had become the subject of plain prudential speculations, in forecasting the choice
of a subject, or of the language in which it should reasonably be treated, that the area of
expectation for an English writer was prodigiously expanding under the development of our national
grandeur, by whatever names of 'colonial' or 'national' it might be varied or disguised. The
issue of the American War, and the sudden expansion of the American Union into a mighty nation
on a scale corresponding to that of the four great European potentates--Russia, Austria, England,
and France--was not in those days suspected. But the tendencies could not be mistaken. And
the same issue was fully anticipated, though undoubtedly through the steps of a very much slower
process. Whilst disputing about the items on the tess apettiele, the disputed facts were overtaking
us, and flying past us, on the most gigantic scale. All things were changing: and the very
terms of the problem were themselves changing, and putting on new aspects, in the process and
at the moment of enunciation. For instance, it had been sufficiently seen that another Christendom,
far more colossal than the old Christendom of Europe, might, and undoubtedly would, form itself
rapidly in America. Against the tens of millions in Europe would rise up, like the earth-born
children of Deucalion and Pyrrha (or of the Theban Cadmus and Hermione) American millions counted
by hundreds. But from what radix? Originally, it would have been regarded as madness to take
Ireland, in her Celtic element, as counting for anything. But of late--whether rationally,
however, I will inquire for a brief moment or so--the counters have all changed in these estimates.
The late Mr O'Connell was the parent of these hyperbolical anticipations. To count his ridiculous
'monster-meetings' by hundreds of thousands, and then at last by millions, cost nobody so much
as a blush; and considering the open laughter and merriment with which all O'Connell estimates
were accepted and looked at, I must think that the London Standard was more deeply to blame
than any other political party, in giving currency and acceptation to the nursery exaggerations
of Mr O'Connell. Meantime those follies came to an end. Mr O'Connell died; all was finished:
and a new form of mendacity was transferred to America. There has always existed in the United
States one remarkable phenomenon of Irish politics applied to the deception of both English,
Americans, and Irish. All people who have given any attention to partisanship and American
politics, are aware of a rancorous malice burning sullenly amongst a small knot of Irishmen,
and applying itself chiefly to the feeding of an interminable feud against England and all
things English. This, as it chiefly expresses itself in American journals, naturally passes
for the product of American violence; which in reality it is not. And hence it happens, and
for many years it has happened, that both Englishmen and Americans are perplexed at intervals
by a malice and an acharnement of hatred to England, which reads very much like that atrocious
and viperous malignity imputed to the father of Hannibal against the Romans. It is noticeable,
both as keeping open a peculiar exasperation of Irish patriotism absurdly directed against
England; as doing a very serious injustice to Americans, who are thus misrepresented as the
organs of this violence, so exclusively Irish; and, finally, as the origin of the monstrous
delusion which I now go on to mention. The pretence of late put forward is, that the preponderant
element in the American population is indeed derived from the British Islands, but by a vast
overbalance from Ireland, and from the Celtic part of the Irish population. This monstrous
delusion has recently received an extravagant sanction from the London Quarterly Review. Half
a dozen other concurrent papers, in journals political and literary, hold the same language.
And the upshot of the whole is--that, whilst the whole English element (including the earliest
colonisation of the New England states at the beginning of the seventeenth century, and including
the whole stream of British emigration since the French Revolution) is accredited for no more
than three and a half millions out of pretty nearly twenty millions of white American citizens,
on the other hand, against this English element, is set up an Irish (meaning a purely Hiberno-Celtic)
element, amounting--oh, genius of blushing, whither hast thou fled?--to a total of eight millions.
Anglo-Saxon blood, it seems, is in a miserable minority in the United States; whilst the German
blood composes, we are told, a respectable nation of five millions; and the Irish-Celtic young
noblemen, though somewhat at a loss for shoes, already count as high as eight millions!

Now, if there were any semblance of truth in all this, we should have very good reason indeed
to tremble for the future prospects of the English language throughout the Union. Eight millions
struggling with three and a half should already have produced some effect on the very composition
of Congress. Meantime, against these audacious falsehoods I observe a reasonable paper in the
Times (August 23, 1852), rating the Celtic contribution from Ireland--that is, exclusively
of all the Ulster contribution--at about two millions; which, however, I view as already an
exaggeration, considering the number that have always by preference resorted to the Canadas.
Two millions, whom poverty, levity, and utter want of all social or political consideration,
have reduced to ciphers the most absolute--two millions, in the very lowest and most abject
point of political depression, cannot do much to disturb the weight of the English language:
which, accordingly, on another occasion, I will proceed to consider, with and without the aid
of the learned Dr Gordon Latham, and sometimes (if he will excuse me) in defiance of that gentleman,
though far enough from defiance in any hostile or unfriendly sense.

THE CASUISTRY OF DUELLING.[13]

This mention of Allan Cunningham recalls to my recollection an affair which retains one part
of its interest to this day, arising out of the very important casuistical question which it
involves. We Protestant nations are in the habit of treating casuistry as a field of speculation,
false and baseless per se; nay, we regard it not so much in the light of a visionary and idle
speculation, as one positively erroneous in its principles, and mischievous for its practical
results. This is due in part to the disproportionate importance which the Church of Rome has
always attached to casuistry; making, in fact, this supplementary section of ethics take precedency
of its elementary doctrines in their catholic simplicity: as though the plain and broad highway
of morality were scarcely ever the safe road, but that every case of human conduct were to
be treated as an exception, and never as lying within the universal rule: and thus forcing
the simple, honest-minded Christian to travel upon a tortuous by-road, in which he could not
advance a step in security without a spiritual guide at his elbow: and, in fact, whenever the
hair-splitting casuistry is brought, with all its elaborate machinery, to bear upon the simplicities
of household life, and upon the daily intercourse of the world, there it has the effect (and
is expressly cherished by the Romish Church with a view to the effect) of raising the spiritual
pastor into a sort of importance which corresponds to that of an attorney. The consulting casuist
is, in fact, to all intents and purposes, a moral attorney. For, as the plainest man, with
the most direct purposes, is yet reasonably afraid to trust himself to his own guidance in
any affair connected with questions of law; so also, when taught to believe that an upright
intention and good sense are equally insufficient in morals, as they are in law, to keep him
from stumbling or from missing his road, he comes to regard a conscience-keeper as being no
less indispensable for his daily life and conversation, than his legal agent, or his professional
'man of business,' for the safe management of his property, and for his guidance amongst the
innumerable niceties which beset the real and inevitable intricacies of rights and duties,
as they grow out of human enactments and a complex condition of society. Fortunately for the
happiness of human nature and its dignity, those holier rights and duties which grow out of
laws heavenly and divine, written by the finger of God upon the heart of every rational creature,
are beset by no such intricacies, and require, therefore, no such vicarious agency for their
practical assertion. The primal duties of life, like the primal charities, are placed high
above us--legible to every eye, and shining like the stars, with a splendour that is read in
every clime, and translates itself into every language at once. Such is the imagery of Wordsworth.
But this is otherwise estimated in the policy of papal Rome: and casuistry usurps a place in
her spiritual economy, to which our Protestant feelings demur. So far, however, the question
between us and Rome is a question of degrees. They push casuistry into a general and unlimited
application; we, if at all, into a very narrow one. But another difference there is between
us even more important; for it regards no mere excess in the quantity of range allowed to casuistry,
but in the quality of its speculations: and which it is (more than any other cause) that has
degraded the office of casuistical learning amongst us. Questions are raised, problems are
entertained, by the Romish casuistry, which too often offend against all purity and manliness
of thinking. And that objection occurs forcibly here, which Southey (either in The Quarterly
Review or in his Life of Wesley) has urged and expanded with regard to the Romish and also
the Methodist practice of auricular confession--viz., that, as it is practically managed, not
leaving the person engaged in this act to confess according to the light of his own conscience,
but at every moment interfering, on the part of the confessor, to suggest leading questions
(as lawyers call them), and to throw the light of confession upon parts of the experience which
native modesty would leave in darkness,--so managed, the practice of confession is undoubtedly
the most demoralising practice known to any Christian society. Innocent young persons, whose
thoughts would never have wandered out upon any impure images or suggestions, have their ingenuity
and their curiosity sent roving upon unlawful quests: they are instructed to watch what else
would pass undetained in the mind, and would pass unblameably, on the Miltonic principle: ('Evil
into the mind of God or man may come unblamed,' &c.) Nay, which is worst of all, unconscious
or semi-conscious thoughts and feelings or natural impulses, rising, like a breath of wind
under some motion of nature, and again dying away, because not made the subject of artificial
review and interpretation, are now brought powerfully under the focal light of the consciousness:
and whatsoever is once made the subject of consciousness, can never again have the privilege
of gay, careless thoughtlessness--the privilege by which the mind, like the lamps of a mail-coach,
moving rapidly through the midnight woods, illuminate, for one instant, the foliage or sleeping
umbrage of the thickets; and, in the next instant, have quitted them, to carry their radiance
forward upon endless successions of objects. This happy privilege is forfeited for ever, when
the pointed significancy of the confessor's questions, and the direct knowledge which he plants
in the mind, have awakened a guilty familiarity with every form of impurity and unhallowed
sensuality.

[13] This appeared in Tait's Magazine for February, 1841. Although practically an independent
paper, it was included in the series entitled 'Sketches of Life and Manners; from the Autobiography
of an English Opium-Eater.' The reference to Allan Cunningham occurs in the previous chapter
of these 'Sketches.'--H.

Here, then, are objections sound and deep, to casuistry, as managed in the Romish church. Every
possible objection ever made to auricular confession applies with equal strength to casuistry;
and some objections, besides these, are peculiar to itself. And yet, after all, these are but
objections to casuistry as treated by a particular church. Casuistry in itself--casuistry as
a possible, as a most useful, and a most interesting speculation--remains unaffected by any
one of these objections; for none applies to the essence of the case, but only to its accidents,
or separable adjuncts. Neither is this any curious or subtle observation of little practical
value. The fact is as far otherwise as can be imagined--the defect to which I am here pointing,
is one of the most clamorous importance. Of what value, let me ask, is Paley's Moral Philosophy?
What is its imagined use? Is it that in substance it reveals any new duties, or banishes as
false any old ones? No; but because the known and admitted duties--duties recognised in every
system of ethics--are here placed (successfully or not) upon new foundations, or brought into
relation with new principles not previously perceived to be in any relation whatever. This,
in fact, is the very meaning of a theory[14] or contemplation, [[Greek: Theôria],] when A,
B, C, old and undisputed facts have their relations to each other developed. It is not, therefore,
for any practical benefit in action, so much as for the satisfaction of the understanding,
when reflecting on a man's own actions, the wish to see what his conscience or his heart prompts
reconciled to general laws of thinking--this is the particular service performed by Paley's
Moral Philosophy. It does not so much profess to tell what you are to do, as the why and the
wherefore; and, in particular, to show how one rule of action may be reconciled to some other
rule of equal authority, but which, apparently, is in hostility to the first. Such, then, is
the utmost and highest aim of the Paleyian or the Ciceronian ethics, as they exist. Meantime,
the grievous defect to which I have adverted above--a defect equally found in all systems of
morality, from the Nichomachéan ethics of Aristotle downwards--is the want of a casuistry,
by way of supplement to the main system, and governed by the spirit of the very same laws,
which the writer has previously employed in the main body of his work. And the immense superiority
of this supplementary section, to the main body of the systems, would appear in this, that
the latter I have just been saying, aspires only to guide the reflecting judgment in harmonising
the different parts of his own conduct, so as to bring them under the same law; whereas the
casuistical section, in the supplement, would seriously undertake to guide the conduct, in
many doubtful cases, of action--cases which are so regarded by all thinking persons. Take,
for example, the case which so often arises between master and servant, and in so many varieties
of form--a case which requires you to decide between some violation of your conscience, on
the one hand, as to veracity, by saying something that is not strictly true, as well as by
evading (and that is often done) all answer to inquiries which you are unable to meet satisfactorily--a
violation of your conscience to this extent, and in this way; or, on the other hand, a still
more painful violation of your conscience in consigning deliberately some young woman--faulty,
no doubt, and erring, but yet likely to derive a lesson from her own errors, and the risk to
which they have exposed her--consigning her, I say, to ruin, by refusing her a character, and
thus shutting the door upon all the paths by which she might retrace her steps. This I state
as one amongst the many cases of conscience daily occurring in the common business of the world.
It would surprise any reader to find how many they are; in fact, a very large volume might
be easily collected of such cases as are of ordinary occurrence. Casuistry, the very word casuistry
expresses the science which deals with such cases: for as a case, in the declension of a noun,
means a falling away, or a deflection from the upright nominative (rectus), so a case in ethics
implies some falling off, or deflection from the high road of catholic morality. Now, of all
such cases, one, perhaps the most difficult to manage, the most intractable, whether for consistency
of thinking as to the theory of morals, or for consistency of action as to the practice of
morals, is the case of DUELLING.

[14] No terms of art are used so arbitrarily, and with such perfect levity, as the terms hypothesis,
theory, system. Most writers use one or other with the same indifference that they use in constructing
the title of a novel, or, suppose, of a pamphlet, where the phrase thoughts, or strictures,
or considerations, upon so and so, are used ad libitum. Meantime, the distinctions are essential.
That is properly an hypothesis where the question is about a cause: certain phenomena are known
and given: the object is to place below these phenomena a basis [[Greek: a hypothosis]] capable
of supporting them, and accounting for them. Thus, if you were to assign a cause sufficient
to account for the aurora borealis, that would be an hypothesis. But a theory, on the other
hand, takes a multitude of facts all disjointed, or, at most, suspected, of some inter-dependency:
these it takes and places under strict laws of relation to each other. But here there is no
question of a cause. Finally, a system is the synthesis of a theory and an hypothesis: it states
the relations as amongst an undigested mass, rudis indigestaque moles, of known phenomena;
and it assigns a basis for the whole, as in an hypothesis. These distinctions would become
vivid and convincing by the help of proper illustrations.

As an introduction, I will state my story--the case for the casuist; and then say one word
on the reason of the case.

First, let me report the case of a friend--a distinguished lawyer at the English bar. I had
the circumstances from himself, which lie in a very small compass; and, as my friend is known,
to a proverb almost, for his literal accuracy in all statements of fact, there need be no fear
of any mistake as to the main points of the case. He was one day engaged in pleading before
the Commissioners of Bankruptcy; a court then, newly appointed, and differently constituted,
I believe, in some respects, from its present form. That particular commissioner, as it happened,
who presided at the moment when the case occurred, had been recently appointed, and did not
know the faces of those who chiefly practised in the court. All things, indeed, concurred to
favour his mistake: for the case itself came on in a shape or in a stage which was liable to
misinterpretation, from the partial view which it allowed of the facts, under the hurry of
the procedure; and my friend, also, unluckily, had neglected to assume his barrister's costume,
so that he passed, in the commissioner's appreciation, as an attorney. 'What if he had been
an attorney?' it may be said: 'was he, therefore, less entitled to courtesy or justice?' Certainly
not; nor is it my business to apologise for the commissioner. But it may easily be imagined,
and (making allowances for the confusion of hurry and imperfect knowledge of the case) it does
offer something in palliation of the judge's rashness, that, amongst a large heap of 'Old Bailey'
attorneys, who notoriously attended this court for the express purpose of whitewashing their
clients, and who were in bad odour as tricksters, he could hardly have been expected to make
a special exception in favour of one particular man, who had not protected himself by the insignia
of his order. His main error, however, lay in misapprehending the case: misapprehension lent
strength to the assumption that my friend was an 'Old Bailey' (i. e., a sharking) attorney;
whilst, on the other hand, that assumption lent strength to his misapprehension of the case.
Angry interruptions began: these, being retorted or resented with just indignation, produced
an irritation and ill temper, which, of themselves, were quite sufficient to raise a cloud
of perplexity over any law process, and to obscure it for any understanding. The commissioner
grew warmer and warmer; and, at length, he had the presumption to say:--'Sir, you are a disgrace
to your profession.' When such sugar-plums, as Captain M'Turk the peacemaker observes, were
flying between them, there could be no room for further parley. That same night the commissioner
was waited on by a friend of the barrister's, who cleared up his own misconceptions to the
disconcerted judge; placed him, even to his own judgment, thoroughly in the wrong; and then
most courteously troubled him for a reference to some gentleman, who would arrange the terms
of a meeting for the next day. The commissioner was too just and grave a man to be satisfied
with himself, on a cool review of his own conduct. Here was a quarrel ripened into a mortal
feud, likely enough to terminate in wounds, or, possibly, in death to one of the parties, which,
on his side, carried with it no palliations from any provocation received, or from wrong and
insult, in any form, sustained: these, in an aggravated shape, could be pleaded by my friend,
but with no opening for retaliatory pleas on the part of the magistrate. That name, again,
of magistrate, increased his offence and pointed its moral: he, a conservator of the laws--he,
a dispenser of equity, sitting even at the very moment on the judgment seat--he to have commenced
a brawl, nay to have fastened a quarrel upon a man even then of some consideration and of high
promise; a quarrel which finally tended to this result--shoot or be shot. That commissioner's
situation and state of mind, for the succeeding night, were certainly not enviable: like Southey's
erring painter, who had yielded to the temptation of the subtle fiend,

    With repentance his only companion he lay;
    And a dismal companion is she.

Meantime, my friend--what was his condition; and how did he pass the interval? I have heard
him feelingly describe the misery, the blank anguish of this memorable night. Sometimes it
happens that a man's conscience is wounded; but this very wound is the means, perhaps, by which
his feelings are spared for the present: sometimes his feelings are lacerated; but this very
laceration makes the ransom for his conscience. Here, on the contrary, his feelings and his
happiness were dimmed by the very same cause which offered pain and outrage to his conscience.
He was, upon principle, a hater of duelling. Under any circumstances, he would have condemned
the man who could, for a light cause, or almost for the weightiest, have so much as accepted
a challenge. Yet, here he was positively offering a challenge; and to whom? To a man whom he
scarcely knew by sight; whom he had never spoken to until this unfortunate afternoon; and towards
whom (now that the momentary excitement of anger had passed away) he felt no atom of passion
or resentment whatsoever. As a free 'unhoused' young man, therefore, had he been such, without
ties or obligations in life, he would have felt the profoundest compunction at the anticipation
of any serious injury inflicted upon another man's hopes or happiness, or upon his own. But
what was his real situation? He was a married man, married to the woman of his choice within
a very few years: he was also a father, having one most promising son, somewhere about three
years old. His young wife and his son composed his family; and both were dependent, in the
most absolute sense, for all they possessed or they expected--for all they had or ever could
have--upon his own exertions. Abandoned by him, losing him, they forfeited, in one hour, every
chance of comfort, respectability, or security from scorn and humiliation. The mother, a woman
of strong understanding and most excellent judgment--good and upright herself--liable, therefore,
to no habit of suspicion, and constitutionally cheerful, went to bed with her young son, thinking
no evil. Midnight came, one, two o'clock; mother and child had long been asleep; nor did either
of them dream of that danger which even now was yawning under their feet. The barrister had
spent the hours from ten to two in drawing up his will, and in writing such letters as might
have the best chance, in case of fatal issue to himself, for obtaining some aid to the desolate
condition of those two beings whom he would leave behind, unprotected and without provision.
Oftentimes he stole into the bedroom, and gazed with anguish upon the innocent objects of his
love; and, as his conscience now told him, of his bitterest perfidy. 'Will you then leave us?
Are you really going to betray us? Will you deliberately consign us to life-long poverty, and
scorn, and grief?' These affecting apostrophes he seemed, in the silence of the night, to hear
almost with bodily ears. Silent reproaches seemed written upon their sleeping features; and
once, when his wife suddenly awakened under the glare of the lamp which he carried, he felt
the strongest impulse to fly from the room; but he faltered, and stood rooted to the spot.
She looked at him smilingly, and asked why he was so long in coming to bed. He pleaded an excuse,
which she easily admitted, of some law case to study against the morning, or some law paper
to draw. She was satisfied; and fell asleep again. He, however, fearing, above all things,
that he might miss the time for his appointment, resolutely abided by his plan of not going
to bed; for the meeting was to take place at Chalk Farm, and by half-past five in the morning:
that is, about one hour after sunrise. One hour and a half before this time, in the gray dawn,
just when the silence of Nature and of mighty London was most absolute, he crept stealthily,
and like a guilty thing, to the bedside of his sleeping wife and child; took, what he believed
might be his final look of them: kissed them softly; and, according to his own quotation from
Coleridge's Remorse,

In agony that could not be remembered;

and a conflict with himself that defied all rehearsal, he quitted his peaceful cottage at Chelsea
in order to seek for the friend who had undertaken to act as his second. He had good reason,
from what he had heard on the night before, to believe his antagonist an excellent shot; and,
having no sort of expectation that any interruption could offer to the regular progress of
the duel, he, as the challenger, would have to stand the first fire; at any rate, conceiving
this to be the fair privilege of the party challenged, he did not mean to avail himself of
any proposal for drawing lots upon the occasion, even if such a proposal should happen to be
made. Thus far the affair had travelled through the regular stages of expectation and suspense;
but the interest of the case as a story was marred and brought to an abrupt conclusion by the
conduct of the commissioner. He was a man of known courage, but he also, was a man of conscientious
scruples; and, amongst other instances of courage, had the courage to own himself in the wrong.
He felt that his conduct hitherto had not been wise or temperate, and that he would be sadly
aggravating his original error by persisting in aiming at a man's life, upon which life hung
also the happiness of others, merely because he had offered to that man a most unwarranted
insult. Feeling this, he thought fit, at first coming upon the ground, to declare that, having
learned, since the scene in court, the real character of his antagonist, and the extent of
his own mistake, he was resolved to brave all appearances and ill-natured judgments, by making
an ample apology; which, accordingly, he did; and so the affair terminated. I have thought
it right, however, to report the circumstances, both because they were really true in every
particular, but, much more, because they place in strong relief one feature, which is often
found in these cases, and which is allowed far too little weight in distributing the blame
between the parties: to this I wish to solicit the reader's attention. During the hours of
this never-to-be-forgotten night of wretchedness and anxiety, my friend's reflection was naturally
forced upon the causes which had produced it. In the world's judgment, he was aware that he
himself, as the one charged with the most weighty responsibility, (those who depended upon
him being the most entirely helpless,) would have to sustain by much the heaviest censure:
and yet what was the real proportion of blame between the parties? He, when provoked and publicly
insulted, had retorted angrily: that was almost irresistible under the constitution of human
feelings; the meekest of men could scarcely do less. But surely the true onus of wrong and
moral responsibility for all which might follow, rested upon that party who, giving way to
mixed impulses of rash judgment and of morose temper, had allowed himself to make a most unprovoked
assault upon the character of one whom he did not know; well aware that such words, uttered
publicly by a person in authority, must, by some course or other, be washed out and cancelled;
or, if not, that the party submitting to such defamatory insults, would at once exile himself
from the society and countenance of his professional brethren. Now, then, in all justice, it
should be so ordered that the weight of public indignation might descend upon him, whoever
he might be, (and, of course, the more heavily, according to the authority of his station and
his power of inflicting wrong,) who should thus wantonly abuse his means of influence, to the
dishonour or injury of an unoffending party. We clothe a public officer with power, we arm
him with influential authority over public opinion; not that he may apply these authentic sanctions
to the backing of his own malice, and giving weight to his private caprices: and, wherever
such abuse takes place, then it should be so contrived that some reaction in behalf of the
injured person might receive a sanction equally public. And, upon this point, I shall say a
word or two more, after first stating my own case; a case where the outrage was far more insufferable,
more deliberate, and more malicious; but, on the other hand, in this respect less effectual
for injury, that it carried with it no sanction from any official station or repute in the
unknown parties who offered the wrong. The circumstances were these:--In 1824, I had come up
to London upon an errand in itself sufficiently vexatious--of fighting against pecuniary embarrassments,
by literary labours; but, as had always happened hitherto, with very imperfect success, from
the miserable thwartings I incurred through the deranged state of the liver. My zeal was great,
and my application was unintermitting; but spirits radically vitiated, chiefly through the
direct mechanical depression caused by one important organ deranged; and, secondly, by a reflex
effect of depression through my own thoughts, in estimating my prospects; together with the
aggravation of my case, by the inevitable exile from my own mountain home,--all this reduced
the value of my exertions in a deplorable way. It was rare indeed that I could satisfy my own
judgment, even tolerably, with the quality of any literary article I produced; and my power
to make sustained exertions, drooped, in a way I could not control, every other hour of the
day: insomuch, that what with parts to be cancelled, and what with whole days of torpor and
pure defect of power to produce anything at all, very often it turned out that all my labours
were barely sufficient (some times not sufficient) to meet the current expenses of my residence
in London. Three months' literary toil terminated, at times, in a result = 0; the whole plus
being just equal to the minus, created by two separate establishments, and one of them in the
most expensive city of the world. Gloomy, indeed, was my state of mind at that period: for,
though I made prodigious efforts to recover my health, (sensible that all other efforts depended
for their result upon this elementary effort, which was the conditio sine qua non for the rest),
yet all availed me not; and a curse seemed to settle upon whatever I then undertook. Such was
my frame of mind on reaching London: in fact it never varied. One canopy of murky clouds (a
copy of that dun atmosphere which settles so often upon London) brooded for ever upon my spirits,
which were in one uniformly low key of cheerless despondency; and, on this particular morning,
my depression had been deeper than usual, from the effects of a long, continuous journey of
300 miles, and of exhaustion from want of sleep. I had reached London, about six o'clock in
the morning, by one of the northern mails; and, resigning myself as usual in such cases, to
the chance destination of the coach, after delivering our bags in Lombard Street, I was driven
down to a great city hotel. Here there were hot baths; and, somewhat restored by this luxurious
refreshment, about eight o'clock I was seated at a breakfast table; upon which, in a few minutes,
as an appendage not less essential than the tea-service, one of the waiters laid that morning's
Times, just reeking from the press. The Times, by the way, is notoriously the leading journal
of Europe anywhere; but, in London, and more peculiarly in the city quarter of London, it enjoys
a pre-eminence scarcely understood elsewhere. Here it is not a morning paper, but the morning
paper: no other is known, no other is cited as authority in matters of fact. Strolling with
my eye indolently over the vast Babylonian confusion of the enormous columns, naturally as
one of the corps littéraire, I found my attention drawn to those regions of the paper which
announced forthcoming publications. Amongst them was a notice of a satirical journal, very
low priced, and already advanced to its third or fourth number. My heart palpitated a little
on seeing myself announced as the principal theme for the malice of the current number. The
reader must not suppose that I was left in any doubt as to the quality of the notice with which
I had been honoured; and that, by possibility, I was solacing my vanity with some anticipation
of honeyed compliments. That, I can assure him, was made altogether impossible, by the kind
of language which flourished in the very foreground of the programme, and even of the running
title. The exposure and depluming (to borrow a good word from the fine old rhetorician, Fuller,)
of the leading 'humbugs' of the age--that was announced as the regular business of the journal:
and the only question which remained to be settled was, the more or less of the degree; and
also one other question, even more interesting still, viz.--whether personal abuse were intermingled
with literary. Happiness, as I have experienced in other periods of my life, deep domestic
happiness, makes a man comparatively careless of ridicule, of sarcasm, or of abuse. But calamity--the
degradation, in the world's eye, of every man who is fighting with pecuniary difficulties--exasperates
beyond all that can be imagined, a man's sensibility to insult. He is even apprehensive of
insult--tremulously fantastically apprehensive, where none is intended; and like Wordsworth's
shepherd, with his very understanding consciously abused and depraved by his misfortunes is
ready to say, at all hours--

    And every man I met or faced,
    Methought he knew some ill of me.

Some notice, perhaps, the newspaper had taken of this new satirical journal, or some extracts
might have been made from it; at all events, I had ascertained its character so well that,
in this respect, I had nothing to learn. It now remained to get the number which professed
to be seasoned with my particular case; and it may be supposed that I did not loiter over my
breakfast after this discovery. Something which I saw or suspected amongst the significant
hints of a paragraph or advertisement, made me fear that there might possibly be insinuations
or downright assertion in the libel requiring instant public notice; and, therefore, on a motive
of prudence, had I even otherwise felt that indifference for slander which now I do feel, but
which, in those years, morbid irritability of temperament forbade me to affect, I should still
have thought it right to look after the work; which now I did: and, by nine o'clock in the
morning--an hour at which few people had seen me for years--I was on my road to Smithfield.
Smithfield? Yes; even so. All known and respectable publishers having declined any connexion
with the work, the writers had facetiously resorted to this aceldama, or slaughtering quarter
of London--to these vast shambles, as typical, I suppose, of their own slaughtering spirit.
On my road to Smithfield, I could not but pause for one moment to reflect on the pure defecated
malice which must have prompted an attack upon myself. Retaliation or retort it could not pretend
to be. To most literary men, scattering their written reviews, or their opinions, by word of
mouth, to the right and the left with all possible carelessness, it never can be matter of
surprise, or altogether of complaint, (unless as a question of degrees,) that angry notices,
or malicious notices, should be taken of themselves. Few, indeed, of literary men can pretend
to any absolute innocence from offence, and from such even as may have seemed deliberate. But
I, for my part, could. Knowing the rapidity with which all remarks of literary men upon literary
men are apt to circulate, I had studiously and resolutely forborne to say anything, whether
of a writer or a book, unless where it happened that I could say something that would be felt
as complimentary. And as to written reviews, so much did I dislike the assumption of judicial
functions and authority over the works of my own brother authors and contemporaries, that I
have, in my whole life, written only two; at that time only one; and that one, though a review
of an English novel, was substantially a review of a German book, taking little notice, or
none, of the English translator; for, although he, a good German scholar now, was a very imperfect
one at that time, and was, therefore, every way open to criticism, I had evaded this invidious
office applied to a novice in literature, and (after pointing out one or two slight blemishes
of trivial importance) all that I said of a general nature was a compliment to him upon the
felicity of his verses. Upon the German author I was, indeed, severe, but hardly as much as
he deserved. The other review was a tissue of merriment and fun; and though, it is true, I
did hear that the fair authoress was offended at one jest, I may safely leave it for any reader
to judge between us. She, or her brother, amongst other Latin epigrams had one addressed to
a young lady upon the loss of her keys. This, the substance of the lines showed to have been
the intention; but (by a very venial error in one who was writing Latin from early remembrance
of it, and not in the character of a professing scholar) the title was written De clavis instead
of De clavibus amissis; upon which I observed that the writer had selected a singular topic
for condolence with a young lady,--viz., 'on the loss of her cudgels;' (clavis, as an ablative,
coming clearly from clava). This (but I can hardly believe it) was said to have offended Miss
H.; and, at all events, this was the extent of my personalities. Many kind things I had said;
much honour; much admiration, I had professed at that period of my life in occasional papers
or private letters, towards many of my contemporaries, but never anything censorious or harsh;
and simply on a principle of courteous forbearance which I have felt to be due towards those
who are brothers of the same liberal profession with one's self. I could not feel, when reviewing
my whole life, that in any one instance, by act, by word, or by intention, I had offered any
unkindness, far less any wrong or insult, towards a brother author. I was at a loss, therefore,
to decipher the impulse under which the malignant libeller could have written, in making (as
I suspected already) my private history the subject of his calumnies. Jealousy, I have since
understood, jealousy, was the foundation of the whole. A little book of mine had made its way
into drawing-rooms where some book of his had not been heard of. On reaching Smithfield, I
found the publisher to be a medical bookseller, and, to my surprise, having every appearance
of being a grave, respectable man; notwithstanding this undeniable fact, that the libellous
journal, to which he thought proper to affix his sanction, trespassed on decency, not only
by its slander, but, in some instances, by downright obscenity; and, worse than that, by prurient
solicitations to the libidinous imagination, through blanks, seasonably interspersed. I said
nothing to him in the way of inquiry; for I easily guessed that the knot of writers who were
here clubbing their virus, had not so ill combined their plans as to leave them open to detection
by a question from any chance stranger. Having, therefore, purchased a set of the journal,
then amounting to three or four numbers, I went out; and in the elegant promenades of Smithfield,
I read the lucubrations of my libeller. Fit academy for such amenities of literature! Fourteen
years have gone by since then; and, possibly, the unknown hound who yelled, on that occasion,
among this kennel of curs, may, long since, have buried himself and his malice in the grave.
Suffice it here to say, that, calm as I am now, and careless on recalling the remembrance of
this brutal libel, at that time I was convulsed with wrath. As respected myself, there was
a depth of malignity in the article which struck me as perfectly mysterious. How could any
man have made an enemy so profound, and not even have suspected it? That puzzled me. For, with
respect to the other objects of attack, such as Sir Humphrey Davy, &c., it was clear that the
malice was assumed; that, at most, it was the gay impertinence of some man upon town, armed
with triple Irish brass from original defect of feeling, and willing to raise an income by
running amuck at any person just then occupying enough of public interest to make the abuse
saleable. But, in my case, the man flew like a bull-dog at the throat, with a pertinacity and
acharnement of malice that would have caused me to laugh immoderately, had it not been for
one intolerable wound to my feelings. These mercenary libellers, whose stiletto is in the market,
and at any man's service for a fixed price, callous and insensible as they are, yet retain
enough of the principles common to human nature, under every modification, to know where to
plant their wounds. Like savage hackney coachmen, they know where there is a raw. And the instincts
of human nature teach them that every man is vulnerable through his female connexions. There
lies his honour; there his strength; there his weakness. In their keeping is the heaven of
his happiness; in them and through them the earthy of its fragility. Many there are who do
not feel the maternal relation to be one in which any excessive freight of honour or sensibility
is embarked. Neither is the name of sister, though tender in early years, and impressive to
the fireside sensibilities, universally and through life the same magical sound. A sister is
a creature whose very property and tendency (qua sister) is to alienate herself, not to gather
round your centre. But the names of wife and daughter these are the supreme and starry charities
of life: and he who, under a mask, fighting in darkness, attacks you there, that coward has
you at disadvantage. I stood in those hideous shambles of Smithfield: upwards I looked to the
clouds, downwards to the earth, for vengeance. I trembled with excessive wrath--such was my
infirmity of feeling at that time, and in that condition of health; and had I possessed forty
thousand lives, all, and every one individually, I would have sacrificed in vindication of
her that was thus cruelly libelled. Shall I give currency to his malice, shall I aid and promote
it by repeating it? No. And yet why not? Why should I scruple, as if afraid to challenge his
falsehoods?--why should I scruple to cite them? He, this libeller, asserted--But faugh!

This slander seemed to have been built upon some special knowledge of me; for I had often spoken
with horror of those who could marry persons in a condition which obliged them to obedience--a
case which had happened repeatedly within my own knowledge; and I had spoken on this ground,
that the authority of a master might be supposed to have been interposed, whether it really
were so or not in favour of his designs; and thus a presumption, however false it might be,
always remained that his wooing had been, perhaps, not the wooing of perfect freedom, so essential
to the dignity of woman, and, therefore, essential to his own dignity; but that perhaps, it
had been favoured by circumstances, and by opportunities created, if it had not even been favoured,
by express exertions of authority. The libeller, therefore, did seem to have some knowledge
of my peculiar opinions: yet, in other points, either from sincere ignorance or from affectation,
and by way of turning aside suspicion, he certainly manifested a non-acquaintance with facts
relating to me that must have been familiar enough to all within my circle.

Let me pursue the case to its last stage. The reader will say, perhaps, why complain of a paltry
journal that assuredly never made any noise; for I, the reader, never heard of it till now.
No, that is very possible; for the truth is, and odd enough it seems, this malicious journal
prospered so little, that, positively, at the seventh No. it stopped. Laugh I did, and laugh
I could not help but do, at this picture of baffled malice: writers willing and ready to fire
with poisoned bullets, and yet perfectly unable to get an effective aim, from sheer want of
co-operation on the part of the public.

However, the case as it respected me, went farther than it did with respect to the public.
Would it be believed that human malice, with respect to a man not even known by sight to his
assailants, as was clear from one part of their personalities, finally--that is to say, months
afterwards--adopted the following course:--The journal had sunk under public scorn and neglect;
neglect at first, but, perhaps, scorn at the last; for, when the writers found that mere malice
availed not to draw public attention, they adopted the plan of baiting their hooks with obscenity;
and they published a paper, professing to be written by Lord Byron, called, 'My Wedding Night;'
and very possible, from internal evidence, to have been really written by him; and yet the
combined forces of Byron and obscenity failed to save them,--which is rather remarkable. Having
sunk, one might suppose the journal was at an end, for good and evil; and, especially, that
all, who had been molested by it, or held up to ridicule, might now calculate on rest. By no
means: First of all they made inquiries about the localities of my residence, and the town
nearest to my own family. Nothing was effected unless they carried the insult, addressed to
my family, into the knowledge of that family and its circle. My cottage in Grasmere was just
280 miles from London, and eighteen miles from any town whatsoever. The nearest was Kendal;
a place of perhaps 16,000 inhabitants; and the nearest therefore, at which there were any newspapers
printed. There were two: one denominated The Gazette; the other The Chronicle. The first was
Tory and Conservative; had been so from its foundation; and was, besides, generous in its treatment
of private character. My own contributions to it I will mention hereafter. The Chronicle, on
the other hand, was a violent reforming journal, and conducted in a partisan spirit. To this
newspaper the article was addressed; by this newspaper it was published; and by this it was
carried into my own 'next-door' neighbourhood. Next-door neighbourhood? But that surely must
be the very best direction these libellers could give to their malice; for there, at least,
the falsehood of their malice must be notorious. Why, yes: and in that which was my neighbourhood,
according to the most literal interpretation of the term, a greater favour could not have been
done me, nor a more laughable humiliation for my unprovoked enemies. Commentary or refutation
there needed none; the utter falsehood of the main allegations were so obvious to every man,
woman, and child, that, of necessity, it discredited even those parts which might, for any
thing known to my neighbours, have been true. Nay, it was the means of procuring for me a generous
expression of sympathy, that would else have been wanting; for some gentlemen of the neighbourhood,
who were but slightly known to me, put the malignant journal into the fire at a public reading-room.
So far was well; but, on the other hand, in Kendal, a town nearly twenty miles distant, of
necessity I was but imperfectly known; and though there was a pretty general expression of
disgust at the character of the publication, and the wanton malignity which it bore upon its
front, since, true or not true, no shadow of a reason was pleaded for thus bringing forward
statements expressly to injure me, or to make me unhappy; yet there must have been many, in
so large a place, who had too little interest in the question, or too limited means of inquiry,
for ever ascertaining the truth. Consequently, in their minds, to this hour, my name, as one
previously known to them, and repeatedly before the town in connexion with political or literary
articles in their Conservative journal, must have suffered.

But the main purpose, for which I have reported the circumstances of these two cases, relates
to the casuistry of duelling. Casuistry, as I have already said, is the moral philosophy of
cases--that is, of anomalous combinations of circumstances--that, for any reason whatsoever,
do not fall, or do not seem to fall, under the general rules of morality. As a general rule,
it must, doubtless, be unlawful to attempt another man's life, or to hazard your own. Very
special circumstances must concur to make out any case of exception; and even then it is evident,
that one of the parties must always be deeply in the wrong. But it does strike me, that the
present casuistry of society upon the question of duelling, is profoundly wrong, and wrong
by manifest injustice. Very little distinction is ever made, in practice, by those who apply
their judgments to such cases, between the man who, upon principle, practises the most cautious
self-restraint and moderation in his daily demeanour, never under any circumstance offering
an insult, or any just occasion of quarrel, and resorting to duel only under the most insufferable
provocation, between this man, on the one side, and the most wanton ruffian, on the other,
who makes a common practice of playing upon other men's feelings, whether in reliance upon
superior bodily strength, or upon the pacific disposition of conscientious men, and fathers
of families. Yet, surely, the difference between them goes the whole extent of the interval
between wrong and right. Even the question, 'Who gave the challenge?' which is sometimes put,
often merges virtually in the transcendant question, 'Who gave the provocation?' For it is
important to observe, in both the cases which I have reported, that the onus of offering the
challenge was thrown upon the unoffending party; and thus, in a legal sense, that party is
made to give the provocation who, in a moral sense, received it. But surely, if even the law
makes allowances for human infirmity, when provoked beyond what it can endure,--we, in our
brotherly judgments upon each other, ought, a fortiori, to take into the equity of our considerations
the amount and quality of the offence. It will be objected that the law, so far from allowing
for, expressly refuses to allow for, sudden sallies of anger or explosions of vindictive fury,
unless in so far as they are extempore, and before the reflecting judgment has had time to
recover itself. Any indication that the party had leisure for calm review, or for a cool selection
of means and contrivances in executing his vindictive purposes, will be fatal to a claim of
that nature. This is true; but the nature of a printed libel is, continually to renew itself
as an insult. The subject of it reads this libel, perhaps, in solitude; and, by a great exertion
of self-command, resolves to bear it with fortitude and in silence. Some days after, in a public
room, he sees strangers reading it also: he hears them scoffing and laughing loudly: in the
midst of all this, he sees himself pointed out to their notice by some one of the party who
happens to be acquainted with his person; and, possibly, if the libel take that particular
shape which excessive malice is most likely to select, he will hear the name of some female
relative, dearer, it may be to him, and more sacred in his ears, than all this world beside,
bandied about with scorn and mockery by those who have not the poor excuse of the original
libellers, but are, in fact, adopting the second-hand malignity of others. Such cases, with
respect to libels that are quickened into popularity by interesting circumstances, or by a
personal interest attached to any of the parties, or by wit, or by extraordinary malice, or
by scenical circumstances, or by circumstances unusually ludicrous, are but too likely to occur;
and, with every fresh repetition, the keenness of the original provocation is renewed, and
in an accelerated ratio. Again, with reference to my own case, or to any case resembling that,
let it be granted that I was immoderately and unreasonably transported by anger at the moment;--I
thought so myself, after a time, when the journal which published the libel sank under the
public neglect; but this was an after consideration; and, at the moment, how heavy an aggravation
was given to the stings of the malice, by the deep dejection, from embarrassed circumstances
and from disordered health, which then possessed me; aggravations, perhaps, known to the libellers
as encouragements for proceeding at the time, and often enough likely to exist in other men's
cases. Now, in the case as it actually occurred, it so happened that the malicious writers
had, by the libel, dishonoured themselves too deeply in the public opinion, to venture upon
coming forward, in their own persons, to avow their own work; but suppose them to have done
so (as, in fact, even in this case, they might have done, had they not published their intention
of driving a regular trade in libel and in slander); suppose them insolently to beard you in
public haunts; to cross your path continually when in company with the very female relative
upon whom they had done their best to point the finger of public scorn; and suppose them further,
by the whole artillery of contemptuous looks, words, gestures, and unrepressed laughter, to
republish, as it were, ratify, and publicly to apply, personally, their own original libel,
as often as chance or as opportunity (eagerly improved) should throw you together in places
of general resort; and suppose, finally, that the central figure--nay, in their account, the
very butt throughout this entire drama of malice--should chance to be an innocent, gentle-hearted,
dejected, suffering woman, utterly unknown to her persecutors, and selected as their martyr
merely for her relationship to yourself--suppose her, in short, to be your wife--a lovely young
woman sustained by womanly dignity, or else ready to sink into the earth with shame, under
the cruel and unmanly insults heaped upon her, and having no protector upon earth but yourself:
lay all this together, and then say whether, in such a case, the most philosophic or the most
Christian patience might not excusably give way; whether flesh and blood could do otherwise
than give way, and seek redress for the past, but, at all events, security for the future,
in what, perhaps, might be the sole course open to you--an appeal to arms. Let it not be said
that the case here proposed, by way of hypothesis, is an extreme one: for the very argument
has contemplated extreme cases: since, whilst conceding that duelling is an unlawful and useless
remedy for cases of ordinary wrong, where there is no malice to resist a more conciliatory
mode of settlement, and where it is difficult to imagine any deliberate insult except such
as is palliated by intoxication--conceding this, I have yet supposed it possible that cases
may arise, with circumstances of contumely and outrage, growing out of deep inexorable malice,
which cannot be redressed, as things now are, without an appeal to the voye de fait. 'But this
is so barbarous an expedient in days of high civilisation.' Why, yes, it labours with the semi-barbarism
of chivalry: yet, on the other hand, this mention of chivalry reminds me to say, that if this
practice of duelling share the blame of chivalry, one memorable praise there is, which also
it may claim as common to them both. It is a praise which I have often insisted on; and the
very sublime of prejudice I would challenge to deny it. Burke, in his well-known apology for
chivalry, thus expresses his sense of the immeasurable benefits which it conferred upon society,
as a supplementary code of law, reaching those cases which the weakness of municipal law was
then unavailing to meet, and at a price so trivial in bloodshed or violence--he calls it 'the
cheap defence of nations.' Yes, undoubtedly; and surely the same praise belongs incontestably
to the law of duelling. For one duel in esse, there are ten thousand, every day of our lives,
amid populous cities, in posse: one challenge is given, a myriad are feared: one life (and
usually the most worthless, by any actual good rendered to society) is sacrificed, suppose
triennially, from a nation; every life is endangered by certain modes of behaviour. Hence,
then, and at a cost inconceivably trifling, the peace of society is maintained in cases which
no law, no severity of police, ever could effectually reach. Brutal strength would reign paramount
in the walks of public life; brutal intoxication would follow out its lawless impulses, were
it not for the fear which now is always in the rear--the fear of being summoned to a strict
summary account, liable to the most perilous consequences. This is not open to denial: the
actual basis upon which reposes the security of us all, the peace of our wives and our daughters,
and our own immunity from the vilest degradations under their eyes, is the necessity, known
to every gentleman, of answering for his outrages in a way which strips him of all unfair advantages,
except one (which is not often possessed), which places the weak upon a level with the strong,
and the quiet citizen upon a level with the military adventurer, or the ruffian of the gambling-house.
The fact, I say, cannot be denied; neither can the low price be denied at which this vast result
is obtained. And it is evident that, on the principle of expediency, adopted as the basis of
morality by Paley, the justification of duelling is complete: for the greatest sum of immediate
happiness is produced at the least possible sacrifice.[15] But there are many men of high moral
principle, and yet not professing to rest upon Christianity, who reject this prudential basis
of ethics as the death of all morality. And these men hold, that the social recognition of
any one out of the three following dangerous and immoral principles, viz.--1st, That a man
may lawfully sport with his own life; 2dly, That he may lawfully sport with the life of another;
3dly, That he may lawfully seek his redress for a social wrong, by any other channel than the
law tribunals of the land: that the recognition of these, or any of them, by the jurisprudence
of a nation, is a mortal wound to the very key-stone upon which the whole vast arch of morality
reposes. Well, in candour, I must admit that, by justifying, in courts of judicature, through
the verdicts of juries, that mode of personal redress and self-vindication, to heal and prevent
which was one of the original motives for gathering into social communities, and setting up
an empire of public law as paramount to all private exercise of power, a fatal wound is given
to the sanctity of moral right, of the public conscience, and of law in its elementary field.
So much I admit; but I say also, that the case arises out of a great dilemma, with difficulties
on both sides; and that, in all practical applications of philosophy, amongst materials so
imperfect as men, just as in all attempts to realize the rigour of mathematical laws amongst
earthly mechanics, inevitably there will arise such dilemmas and cases of opprobrium to the
reflecting intellect. However, in conclusion, I shall say four things, which I request my opponent,
whoever he may be, to consider; for they are things which certainly ought to have weight; and
some important errors have arisen by neglecting them.

[15] Neither would it be open to Paley to plead that the final or remotest consequences must
be taken into the calculation; and that one of these would be the weakening of all moral sanctions,
and thus, indirectly, an injury to morality, which might more than compensate the immediate
benefit to social peace and security; for this mode of arguing the case would bring us back
to the very principle which his own implicitly, or by involution, rejects: since it would tell
us to obey the principle itself without reference to the apparent consequences. By the bye,
Paley has an express section of his work against the law of honour as a valid rule of action;
but, as Cicero says of Epicurus, it matters little what he says; the question for us is quam
sibi convenienter, how far consistently with himself. Now, as Sir James Mackintosh justly remarks,
all that Paley says in refutation of the principle of worldly honour is hollow and unmeaning.
In fact, it is merely one of the commonplaces adopted by satire, and no philosophy at all.
Honour, for instance, allows you, upon paying gambling debts, to neglect or evade all others:
honour, again, allows you to seduce a married woman: and he would secretly insinuate that honour
enjoins all this; but it is evident that honour simply forbears to forbid all this: in other
words, it is a very limited rule of action, not applying to one case of conduct in fifty. It
might as well be said, that Ecclesiastical Courts sanction murder, because that crime lies
out of their jurisdiction.

First, then, let him remember that it is the principle at stake--viz., the recognition by a
legal tribunal, as lawful or innocent of any attempt to violate the laws, or to take the law
into our own hands: this it is and the mortal taint which is thus introduced into the public
morality of a Christian land, thus authentically introduced; thus sealed and countersigned
by judicial authority; the majesty of law actually interfering to justify, with the solemnities
of trial, a flagrant violation of law; this it is, this only, and not the amount of injury
sustained by society, which gives value to the question. I would do anything for the sake of you and D. Francisco ...

- No - Rosalie said briskly, hurt to hear the name of her husband
-. This is my business exclusively.

Nor is there to do anything Bringas find out ... Oh, it's up to me,
mine ...

- Ah ... ya - Refugio muttered, looking again staring at
the eyebrows.

Rosalie said that after observing it, the damn tossed back into the
sewing ... Is it finally softened and took out the tickets?

No. .. He made a gesture of person who strives in character to overcome his weakness, and
repeated

"I can not, I can not ... And you do not get me, who would get it?

By you or by D. Francisco do the impossible, and I take away the bread from their mouths. Believe
me, I have afraid of my lack of character, I am very silly, and if
you make me cry a lot, I might soften and fall into the folly of paying
the money, the stupid, yes, because I badly needed it.

"

"Nothing - Rosalie thought made a basilisk -. This shameless you want me to kneel front ...
I do not see it. "

Aloud, affecting a calm that was far from having, he said: - "If such
extortion get tired, there is nothing said.

"

- I can not, I can not. It's a big commitment which I have expressed the Sanchez ...-- the tone
of one who cuts a question.

- Well, do not worry ...

- With that ... And how have you been to bathrooms?

This complete change in the conversation, put Rosalia on tenterhooks. Bent the blade. No had to
think about the loan.

The stupid question of the lady replied summer the first nonsense
that came into his mouth.

At that moment I felt so hot that it would lying in soak to prevent complete combustion of
your body at all.

"Daughter, made here a horrible embarrassment."

- Wait, timber entornaré less light to enter.

For a while, the Pipaón, with the heart in her mouth, looked at the
pictures of bullfighters adorn the wall.

One appeared confused with the agonizing discomfort of his soul. He subdued his desire dignity
in such a way that did not hesitate a bit more humble. Giving a tap with her fan Refugio's knee,
spoke these words, which had to give, not without difficulty, a slightly warm twang:

"Go, woman, lend that money."

- What? - Refugio asked surprised.

Ah, money. Believe me, I remembered the such a thing ... But what, makes it so necessary? Is
it so hard the flush? Frankly, I I thought you was a revenue, not taking.

In this mischievous observation, would have answered those swinging
Rosalia matted unkempt.

But what could I do? Bitterness and undergo swallowing everything.

"Yes, child, commitment is Fuertecillo. If you want, you will interest ... at your convenience.
"

- Jesus, I do not offend you. If I pay you what you want, and I am sorry not to be in a situation,
I would without interest. Among people in the family should not be otherwise.

When he heard of this good piece Pipaón that was among the family, was about to lose his temper
... It was too much to resist punishment that ordnance. Rosalia gritted teeth, with few faces
were needed to mimic smiles. "I must be foaming at the mouth - I thought -. If I go from here soon,
I think I give something. "

Refugio again put his hand into the sewing room and took the bundle of banknotes. Jesus divine!
If the end be resolved ...! La de Bringas saw her with undisguised lust, rubbing and review
notes as if the count. Then, shaking his head in despair, said the very ... "If I do not have nothing
... Ah, madam, it is not possible, it is not possible. "

But the package did not save where I was, but put it on the fireplace. This detail dead stoked
hopes of Rosalia.

"For look you - added the other stretching on the couch like a bed, and playing His feet almost
the knees of the lady -; here that I see, I'm ruined. I got into I do not understand business,
and as I have no character, all have taken advantage of my pavisosería to exploit. At first, fine
sea salt and sand ... I received gender, Ladies come and take him through the roof. As it was all
the best, and not expensive indeed. But when they played to pay ...
here I want to see.

"Let me wait a week goes ... "" That'll stop by there ... "" That again ... "" That I have
... "" That makes, which turns " and finale, misery and cheating. Oh, how Madrid this, everything
looks. Said a gentleman I know that this is a carnival every day, in which the poor are rich
dress. And here, except half a dozen, all are poor.

Facha, ma'am, and nothing more than facade.

These people knows no indoor facilities. Living on the street, and dress well and be able to
go the theater, no family that stays all year round tortilla chips ... I know ladies of employees who
are laid off half of the year, and glad to see them as goons.

Seem duchesses, princes and children. How so? I do not know. Said a gentleman I know, that
is full of such mysteries Madrid. Many do not eat to dress, but some they manage otherwise ...
I know stories, ah, I've seen the world ... such are seeking the life, such as negotiating the
cloth, and then talk about others as if they were not worse! ... Total, that what I have become
sold more than half: the other half is on the loose out there, and
no Christian that the copper.

Blow-pots, phantoms! And then came here giving a ratatouille ... "Vast ...-- say to me - I do
not cheat anyone, I live for my work. But half a world deceive you, and you want to make silk
dresses with the bread of the poor " And hear you blow smoke in those mouths, criticizing and looking
down on other poor. Some has been that after looking at me over his shoulder, and do not to pay
me a thousand tangles, have come here asking for money ... And what would it be? ... perhaps to
give to his beloved. "

When you release the string with an emphasis and a heat declared her possessed be very case of
the unfortunate candidate threw burning eyes. This, greatly inflating nostrils, eyes downcast, the
weary breath, heard and gagged and contained their furious desire to do or say whatever nonsense.

XLVII

'That's
audacity - had told her - for the cynicism with which you talk about women, whose shoe does
not deserve to be barefoot, you should start the viper's tongue and then publicly whip the streets,
naked from the waist up, well, well, well ...».

In his mind, gave him the lashes and put it in the flesh. Tan and Bringas was flown and big effort
needed to do to restrain himself, he found preferable to any disaster Domestic horrible torment
he suffered. "I'm going - I thought - I can not endure. I prefer I despise my husband and enslave
me, to me spit this miserable face like me spitting. "

But in thinking this, figurábase see Mr. de Torquemada exposing D.
Francisco, with donut in front, the obligation to satisfy the debt,
then we represented the angry husband ... No, with all the power of
his imagination, could not represent the anger of that noble holy
man as an enemy of tangles.

"Before that - he concluded by saying - everything, everything, including that early strawberry
stomp me ... I single step the shame, nobody knows me and no one has to take me to the face. "

"A gentleman friend of mine - going from shelter said that tone of jovial convinced the light
- told me that everything here is pobretería, that there's no real
aristocracy, and the great Most of those passing by the rich and skulls
are nothing more than a cheesy ... Because you see ... What country
in the world is a lady with a title like Telleria, asking a thousand
walk provided real, how I order them to me?

This has been who has been shot by Real have lost six hundred to a letter. And when a young
gentleman to spend one hundred clarets a woman they say has ruined
the family.

They do not want to talk about living in caps, as muchitos whom I know who go to theaters with
tickets given away, traveling free, and get dressed up and used by
others ... All for pretend!

... When I see these such, I get I very hollow, because they owe
anyone, and if so I'll pay; vivo of my work, and nobody has to do
with my actions, and the first thing I say is that deception to anyone
that I do not want so leave me, are you?, because of mine as ... Celestina
di Levante and go to bring us coffee.

Do you want coffee? ".

- Thank you, "said Rosalie with despondency, and spent the forces.

Rose to retire.

I hated that woman so much and thereby hurt his pride ordinariness of these expressions and
the baseness of those thoughts that would not humiliate more. Shelter stopped her by the arm,
saying in a laugh:

"You really do not want you to take coffee with us? Wait, that's going
to give me the money.

"

Rosalie sat down and alegrósele the soul with these words. That little devil in front of him and
that made him a thousand faces indecent, it became a human and even
enjoyable.

"It's two-room" - Rosalia sighed unable to stop smiling, and finding particular grace in the big
mouth and jagged teeth of Refuge.

- What time have to pay?

- A three - let's say the other is with great spontaneity.

- Still
have time.

They heard the sound of the door had slammed Celestina, to go in search of coffee. The tooth less,
stretching more and taking a more than lazy, vulgar, we he laughed very rude:

"If the Lady were here, would not you those apurillos, because lie at his feet and cry a little
... They say that Mrs. comfort to all the friends that you go with
stories and having mean or dissolute husbands.

Already seen, if I had in my hand, as it all the money in the nation, would too. But let you
be, which already comply accounts. Said a gentleman who comes home,
that now really is armed.

"

"But how many men you know, great point? - I would have said Rosalie, had been in a position
to be severe -. You try with all the knights of the human race. Is there no one you pull, a slap, all
your remaining teeth, and which, incidentally, they are beautiful?

".

- Yes, it is now - he said confidently Refuge - a change of scenery ... Go with God. There shall
be freedom, freedom ...

This lack of respect, this way of speaking of His Majesty so angry at the lady, who was about
to upset all his circumspection and reached the infamous and say

"To learn to speak as they should, taking scratch ...».

Satisfied with two or three monosyllables of disapproval. His face
was already like a pepper.

In one of those handfuls which gave the Sanchez threw a basket that was on fire, and he dropped
a pack cigars.

"Do you also smoke, cochinaza?" - Would it Rosalia asked if I could
speak with spontaneity; But looked at from the ground to collect another
packet, and said nothing.

Soon came the waiter with the coffee, and left the service on the
nightstand.

It was necessary to remove many things to make room.

Shelter and Celestina, after repeating his invitation to Rosalia,
were prepared to take it.

Both were given the same treatment respectively tuteaban be equally
frank.

I said, it was not known which of the two was the maid and what the lady, but really Celestina
was defeated a little more than the other.

"Virgen del Carmen! - Rosalie said to himself -. With what people
have gotten me!

... If the Lord I removed the good of this evil way, never again make another such. "

- Celeste - nicked said in a friendly way - what I do my hair today?

The other explained his delay with how much he had to do.

Everything was still not fixed, the cabinet as a den, the bedroom as well ... When refugees ended
up taking their coffee and Celestina began to put some order in the
cabinet, Rosalia, unable to restrain his impatience, slammed shut
the fan ...

"It must be very late.

Perhaps a quarter to three. "

- The worst of all - Shelter said, toying with his victim - is that
... Now I remember ... If I can not, I can not give you anything.

I had already forgotten today, this very evening, I have to pay two
thousand and some real.

Rosalia firmly believed that a snake was coiled around his chest,
squeezing to drown.

He had just strength to say anything.

It seemed rushed to nail him on that miserable devilish face ten nails of his upper extremities.
But this is sometimes think and want, is rarely done.

Rose ... Could only articulate a guttural sound, weak expression
of their anger, the grip of dignity.

"He's playing me like a cat with a ball of paper thought ...-- -. I'm going, if not, the drowning
...».

- Wait for you - said Refugio -.

I can think of one thing. Just who has promised to help you, so I
would not go back.

The word is a word imperial emperor Sánchez ... And above all, in the case of the family ...

"Release
the family of your filthy mouth" - had told Rosalie.

- Well, it occurs to me that I can ask a friend.

- But you take charge of the time it is? - Rosalia said, regaining hope.

- If you live near here, on Calle de la Sal ..

- But you're with
that quiet?

- Quia ... I have time to comb.

Celestina!

- Women ... not have time.

Refugio stood. Rosalia, taking some steps toward her, grabbed her
dress and cupped, making a move to put it ...

- Lie down this dress
... you wear a robe, a scarf over her head ...

Refugio went to the
bedroom. Since she said: "my corset?" And he took it Rosalia, and
helped him ceñírselo. When they were in such an operation, the sly
was allowed to say this:

"Well Mr. Fish could relieve you of these
bays ... But it always takes him with money. Now walk the poor Tronadillo
...».

Rosalie said nothing. Shame burned his face and oppressed his
heart. What made was tightening the corset and pull cord furiously,
as if to split into two halves the body of the devil.

"Madam, by
God, I divide you ... I do not trouble me much. That is left to Gordon
who want to wear a sylph-like tallecito ... Do you think, do you peinaré?.
"

- No ... recógete hair with a hairnet, with a ribbon ... So you
very well ... you better ... with that hair disheveled ... You look
like a Herodias's in a box Palacio ... Come Aviate ... climb that
hair ... Look it's too late ... Let's see, I'll help.

Sentosa Refugio,
Bringas and give her a thick head of hair in a jiffy.

"What a girl
that I've missed ...-- Sanchez said, laughing -. Both honor ...!».

And
then when it seemed ready to leave, he started singing and walking
around the cabinet. Rosalie saw with horror that he sat in a chair
calmly.

"But women !...»-- Bringas said the sulfur ...

There was
in his brain a rebullicio like wall clocks just before giving hour.
And the other with refined quiet and said:

"It is very hot, I have
no desire to leave."

- But you ... Do you play ... or what ...?

-
Do not worry, ma'am, no rears, no exalted - said the Sanchez -. If
I comes with sofoquinas and that of command and control, we have not
done anything. You at home and I in mine. The five thousand reais
... you watch them, here they are. Not going out is the to give, and
I look for what I need.

XLVIII

However, despite this, they are not
put in hand, Rosalie was on tenterhooks.

"And I'll give you a tip
- continued miserable - good advice, to see me interested by the family.
And walk not in trouble with Mrs. Milagros, who is able to return
Reverse the most sense. Get into your corner, on the verge of stepping-ants,
and let stories ... Do not go home for Sobrino and believe. Madrid
is far east. Do not rely on the cuddling of the Telleria, who is very
crafty and very pussy. "

Rosalia nodding acquiescence. Finally, Sanchez
put the ticket in his hand ... Oh, how she felt in her soul rest the
unfortunate lady! ... For if the devil is happening remove them, decided
to leave without delay.

"What, are you going?".

- It's too late.
I can not miss a minute. You know I really appreciate it. Ah ... Want
we make a recibito?

- You do not - said Refuge to boot, by drawing
a noble and selfless -. It is, therefore, the seconds who are
the proper objects of notice for courts of honour; and the error has been, in framing the project
of such a court, to imagine the inquiry too much directed upon the behaviour of those who cease
to be free agents from the very moment that they become liable to any legal investigation whatever:
simply as quarrellers, the parties are no objects of question; they are not within the field
of any police review; and the very first act which brings them within that field, translates
the responsibility (because the free agency) from themselves to their seconds. The whole questio
vexata, therefore, reduces itself to these logical moments, (to speak the language of mathematics:)
the two parties mainly concerned in the case of duelling, are Society and the Seconds. The
first, by authorising such a mode of redress; the latter, by conducting it. Now, I presume,
it will be thought hopeless to arraign Society at the bar of any earthly court, or apply any
censure or any investigation to its mode of thinking.[16] To the principals, for the reasons
given, it would be unjust to apply them; and the inference is, that the seconds are the parties
to whom their main agency should be directed--as the parties in whose hands lies the practical
control of the whole affair, and the whole machinery of opportunities, (so easily improved
by a wise humanity)--for sparing bloodshed, for promoting reconciliation, for making those
overtures of accommodation and generous apology which the brave are so ready to agree to, in
atonement for hasty words, or rash movements of passion, but which it is impossible for them
to originate. In short, for impressing the utmost possible spirit of humanising charity and
forbearance upon a practice which, after all, must for ever remain somewhat of an opprobrium
to a Christian people; but which, tried by the law of worldly wisdom, is the finest bequest
of chivalry; the most economic safety-valve for man's malice that man's wit could devise; the
most absolute safe-guard of the weak against the brutal; and, finally, (once more to borrow
the words of Burke,) in a sense the fullest and most practical, 'the cheap defence of nations;'
not indeed against the hostility which besieges from without, but against the far more operative
nuisance of bad passions that vex and molest the social intercourse of men by ineradicable
impulses from within.

[16] If it be asked by what title I represent Society as authorising (nay, as necessitating)
duels, I answer, that I do not allude to any floating opinions of influential circles in society;
for these are in continual conflict, and it may be difficult even to guess in which direction
the preponderance would lie. I build upon two undeniable results, to be anticipated in any
regular case of duel, and supported by one uniform course of precedent:--First, That, in a
civil adjudication of any such case, assuming only that it has been fairly conducted, and agreeably
to the old received usages of England, no other verdict is ever given by a jury than one of
acquittal. Secondly, That, before military tribunals, the result is still stronger; for the
party liable to a challenge is not merely acquitted, as a matter of course, if he accepts it
with any issue whatsoever, but is positively dishonoured and degraded (nay, even dismissed
the service, virtually under colour of a request that he will sell out) if he does not. These
precedents form the current law for English society, as existing amongst gentlemen. Duels,
pushed à l'outrance, and on the savage principles adopted by a few gambling ruffians on the
Continent, (of which a good description is given in the novel of The most unfortunate Man in
the World,) or by old buccaneering soldiers of Napoleon, at war with all the world, and in
the desperation of cowardice, demanding to fight in a saw-pit or across a table,--this sort
of duels is as little recognised by the indulgence of English law, as, in the other extreme,
the mock duels of German Burschen are recognised by the gallantry of English society. Duels
of the latter sort would be deemed beneath the dignity of judicial inquiry: duels of the other
sort, beyond its indulgence. But all other duels, fairly managed in the circumstances, are
undeniably privileged amongst non-military persons, and commanded to those who are military.

I may illustrate the value of one amongst the suggestions I have made, by looking back and
applying it to part of my last anecdote: the case of that promising person who was cut off
so prematurely for himself, and so ruinously for the happiness of the surviving antagonist.
I may mention, (as a fact known to me on the very best authority,) that the Duke of Wellington
was consulted by a person of distinction, who had been interested in the original dispute,
with a view to his opinion upon the total merits of the affair, on its validity, as a 'fighting'
quarrel, and on the behaviour of the parties to it. Upon the last question, the opinion of
his Grace was satisfactory. His bias, undoubtedly, if he has any, is likely to lie towards
the wisdom of the peacemaker; and possibly, like many an old soldier, he may be apt to regard
the right of pursuing quarrels by arms as a privilege not hastily to be extended beyond the
military body. But, on the other question, as to the nature of the quarrel, the duke denied
that it required a duel; or that a duel was its natural solution. And had the duke been the
mediator, it is highly probable that the unfortunate gentleman would now have been living.
Certainly, the second quarrel involved far less of irritating materials than the first. It
grew out of a hasty word, and nothing more; such as drops from parliamentary debaters every
night of any interesting discussion--drops hastily, is as hastily recalled, or excused, perhaps,
as a venial sally of passion, either by the good sense or the magnanimity of the party interested
in the wrong. Indeed, by the unanimous consent of all who took notice of the affair, the seconds,
or one of them at least, in this case, must be regarded as deeply responsible for the tragical
issue; nor did I hear of one person who held them blameless, except that one who, of all others,
might the most excusably have held them wrong in any result. But now, from such a case brought
under the review of a court, such as I have supposed, and improved in the way I have suggested,
a lesson so memorable might have been given to the seconds, by a two-years' imprisonment--punishment
light enough for the wreck of happiness which they caused--that soon, from this single case,
raised into a memorable precedent, there would have radiated an effect upon future duels for
half a century to come. And no man can easily persuade me that he is in earnest about the extinction
of duelling, who does not lend his countenance to a suggestion which would, at least, mitigate
the worst evils of the practice, and would, by placing the main agents in responsibility to
the court, bring the duel itself immediately under the direct control of that court; would
make a legal tribunal not reviewers subsequently, but, in a manner, spectators of the scene;
and would carry judicial moderation and skill into the very centre of angry passions; not,
as now they act, inefficiently to review, and, by implication, sometimes to approve their most
angry ebullitions, but practically to control and repress them.

THE LOVE-CHARM.

A TALE FROM THE GERMAN OF TIECK.[17]

Emilius was sitting in deep thought at his table, awaiting his friend Roderick. The light was
burning before him; the winter evening was cold; and to-day he wished for the presence of his
fellow-traveller, though at other times wont rather to avoid his society: for on this evening
he was about to disclose a secret to him, and beg for his advice. The timid, shy Emilius found
in every business and accident of life so many difficulties, such insurmountable hindrances,
that it might seem to have been an ironical whim of his destiny which brought him and Roderick
together, Roderick being in everything the reverse of his friend. Inconstant, flighty, always
determined by the first impression, and kindling in an instant, he engaged in everything, had
a plan for every occasion; no undertaking was too arduous for him, no obstacle could deter
him. But in the midst of the pursuit he slackened and wearied just as suddenly as at first
he had caught fire and sprung forward. Whatever then opposed him, was for him not a spur to
urge him onward, but only led him to abandon what he had so hotly rushed into; so that Roderick
was every day thoughtlessly beginning something new, and with no better cause relinquishing
and idly forgetting what he had begun the day before. Hence, never a day passed but the friends
got into a quarrel, which seemed to threaten the death of their friendship; and yet what to
all appearance thus severed them, was perhaps the very thing that most closely bound them together;
each loved the other heartily; but each found passing satisfaction in being able to discharge
the most justly deserved reproaches upon his friend.

[17] See the remarks in Prefatory Note, vol. i.

Emilius, a rich young man, of a susceptible and melancholy temperament, on the death of his
parents had become master of his fortune. He had set out on a journey in order thereby to complete
his education, but had now already spent several months in a large town, for the sake of enjoying
the pleasures of the carnival, about which he never gave himself the least trouble, and of
making certain arrangements of importance about his fortune with some relations, to whom as
yet he had scarcely paid a visit. On the road he had fallen in with the restless, ever-shifting
and veering Roderick, who was living at variance with his guardians, and who, to free himself
wholly from them and their burdensome admonitions, eagerly grasped at the opportunity held
out to him by his new friend of becoming his companion on his travels. During their journey
they had often been on the point of separating; but each after every dispute had only felt
the more clearly that he could not live without the other. Scarce had they left their carriage
in any town, when Roderick had already seen everything remarkable in it, to forget it all again
on the morrow; while Emilius took a week to acquire a thorough knowledge of the place from
his books, lest he should omit seeing anything that was to be seen; and after all, from indolence
and indifference thought there was hardly anything worth his while to go and look at. Roderick
had immediately made a thousand acquaintances, and visited every public place of entertainment;
often too he brought his new-made friends to the lonely chamber of Emilius, and would then
leave him alone with them, as soon as they began to tire him. At other times he would confound
the modest Emilius by extravagantly praising his merits and his acquirements before intelligent
and learned men, and by giving them to understand how much they might learn from his friend
about languages, or antiquities, or the fine arts, although he himself could never find time
for listening to him on such subjects, when the conversation happened to turn on them. But
if Emilius ever chanced to be in a more active mood, he might almost make sure of his truant
friend having caught cold the night before at a ball or a sledge-party, and being forced to
keep his bed; so that, with the liveliest, most restless, and most communicative of men for
his companion, Emilius lived in the greatest solitude.

To-day he confidently expected him; for Roderick had been forced to give him a solemn promise
of spending the evening with him, in order to learn what it was that for weeks had been depressing
and agitating his thoughtful friend. Meanwhile Emilius wrote down the following lines:

    'Tis sweet when spring its choir assembles,
      And every nightingale is steeping
      The trees in his melodious weeping,
    Till leaf and bloom with rapture trembles.

    Fair is the net which moonlight weaves;
      Fair are the breezes' gambolings,
      As with lime-odours on their wings
    They chase each other through the leaves.

    Bright is the glory of the rose,
      When Love's rich magic decks the earth,
      From countless roses Love looks forth,
    Those stars wherewith Love's heaven glows.

    But sweeter, fairer, brighter far
      To me that little lamp's pale gleaming,
      When through the narrow casement streaming,
    It bids me hail my evening star;

    As from their braids her locks she flings,
      Then twines them in a flowery band,
      While at each motion of her hand
    The white robe to her fair form clings;

    Or when she breaks her lute's deep slumbers,
      And as at morning's touch up-darting,
      The notes, beneath her fingers starting,
    Dance o'er the strings in playful numbers.

    To stop their flight her voice she pours
      Full after them; they laugh and fly,
      And to my heart for refuge hie;
    Her voice pursues them through its doors.

    Leave me, ye fierce ones! hence remove!
      They bar themselves within, and say,
      'Till this be broken, here we stay,
    That thou mayst know what 'tis to love.'

Emilius arose fretfully. It grew darker, and Roderick came not, and he was wishing to tell
him of his love for an unknown fair one, who dwelt in the opposite house, and who kept him
all day long at home, and waking through many a night. At length footsteps sounded up the stairs;
the door opened without anybody knocking at it, and in walked two gay masks with ugly visages,
one a Turk, dressed in red and blue silk, the other a Spaniard in pale yellow and pink with
many waving feathers on his hat. As Emilius was becoming impatient, Roderick took off his mask,
showed his well-known laughing countenance, and said: 'Heyday, my good friend, what a drowned
puppy of a face! Is this the way to look in carnival time? I and our dear young officer are
come to fetch you away. There is a grand ball to-night at the masquerade rooms; and as I know
you have forsworn ever going out in any other suit than that which you always wear, of the
devil's own colour, come with us as black as you are, for it is already somewhat late.'

Emilius felt angry, and said: 'You have, it seems, according to custom, altogether forgotten
our agreement. I am extremely sorry,' he continued, turning to the stranger, 'that I cannot
possibly accompany you; my friend has been over-hasty in promising for me; indeed I cannot
go out at all, having something of importance to talk to him about.'

The stranger, who was well-bred, and saw what Emilius meant, withdrew; but Roderick, with the
utmost indifference, put on his mask again, placed himself before the glass, and said: 'Verily
I am a hideous figure, am I not? To say the truth, it is a tasteless, worthless, disgusting
device.'

'That there can be no question about,' answered Emilius, in high indignation. 'Making a caricature
of yourself, and making a fool of yourself, are among the pleasures you are always driving
after at full gallop.'

'Because you do not like dancing yourself,' said the other, 'and look upon dancing as a mischievous
invention, not a soul in the world must wear a merry face. How tiresome it is, when a person
is made up of nothing but whims!'

'Doubtless!' replied his angry friend, 'and you give me ample opportunity for finding that
it is so. I thought after our agreement you would have given me this evening; but----'

'But it is the carnival, you know,' pursued the other, 'and all my acquaintances and certain
fair ladies are expecting me at the grand ball to-night. Assure yourself, my good friend, it
is mere disease in you that makes you so unreasonable against all such matters.'

'Which of us has the fairest claim to disease,' said Emilius, 'I will not examine. At least
your inconceivable frivolousness, your hunger and thirst after stop-gaps for every hour you
are awake, your wild-goose chase after pleasures that leave the heart empty, seem not to me
altogether the healthiest state of the soul. In certain things, at all events, you might make
a little allowance for my weakness, if it must once for all pass for such: and there is nothing
in the world that so jars through and through me as a ball with its frightful music. Somebody
once said, that to a deaf person who cannot hear the music, a set of dancers must look like
so many patients for a mad-house; but, in my opinion, this dreadful music itself, this twirling
and whirling and pirouetting of half a dozen notes, each treading on its own heels, in those
accursed tunes which ram themselves into our memories, yea, I might say, mix themselves up
with our very blood, so that one cannot get rid of their taint for many a miserable day after--this
to me is the very trance of madness; and if I could ever bring myself to think dancing endurable,
it must be dancing to the tune of silence.'

'Well done, signor Paradox-monger!' exclaimed the mask. 'Why, you are so far gone, that you
think the most natural, most innocent, and merriest thing in the world unnatural, ay, and shocking.'

'I cannot change my feelings,' said his grave friend. 'From my very childhood these tunes have
made me wretched, and have often well-nigh driven me out of my senses. They are to me the ghosts
and spectres and furies in the world of sound, and come thus and buzz round my head, and grin
at me with horrid laughter.'

'All nervous irritability!' returned the other; 'just like your extravagant abhorrence of spiders
and many other harmless insects.'

'Harmless you call them,' cried Emilius, now quite untuned, 'because you have no repugnance
toward them. To one, however, who feels the same disgust and loathing, the same nameless horror,
that I feel, rise up in his soul and shoot through his whole being at the sight of them, these
miscreate deformities, such as toads, spiders, or that most loathsome of nature's excrements,
the bat, are not indifferent or insignificant: their very existence is directly at enmity and
wages war with his. In truth, one might smile at the unbelievers whose imagination is too barren
for ghosts and fearful spectres, and those births of night which we see in sickness, to take
root therein, or who stare and marvel at Dante's descriptions, when the commonest every-day
life brings before our eyes such frightful distorted master-pieces among the works of horror.
Yet, can we really and faithfully love the beautiful, without being stricken with pain at the
sight of such monstrosities?'

'Wherefore stricken with pain?' asked Roderick. 'Why should the great realm of the waters and
the seas present us with nothing but those terrors which you have accustomed yourself to find
there? Why not rather look on such creatures as strange, entertaining, and ludicrous mummers,
and on the whole region in the light of a great masked ball-room? But your whims go still further;
for as you love roses with a kind of idolatry, there are many flowers for which you have a
no less vehement hatred: yet what harm has the dear good tulip ever done you, or all the other
dutiful children of summer that you persecute? So again you have an aversion to many colours,
to many scents, and to many thoughts; and you take no pains to harden yourself against these
weaknesses, but yield to them and sink down into them as into a luxurious feather-bed; and
I often fear I shall lose you altogether some day, and find nothing but a patchwork of whims
and prejudices sitting at that table instead of my Emilius.'

Emilius was wrath to the bottom of his heart, and answered not a word. He had long given up
all design of making his intended confession; nor did the thoughtless Roderick show the least
wish to hear the secret which his melancholy friend had announced to him with such an air of
solemnity. He sat carelessly in the arm-chair, playing with his mask, when he suddenly cried:
'Be so kind, Emilius, as to lend me your large cloak.'

'What for?' asked the other.

'I hear music in the church on the opposite side of the street,' answered Roderick, 'and this
hour has hitherto escaped me every evening since we have been here. To-day it comes just as
if called for. I can hide my dress under your cloak, which will also cover my mask and turban,
and when it is over I can go straight to the ball.'

Emilius muttered between his teeth as he looked in the wardrobe for his cloak, then constraining
himself to an ironical smile, gave it to Roderick, who was already on his legs. 'There is my
Turkish dagger which I bought yesterday,' said the mask, as he wrapped himself up; 'put it
by for me; it is a bad habit carrying about toys of cold steel: one can never tell what ill
use may be made of them, should a quarrel arise, or any other knot which it is easier to cut
than to untie. We meet again to-morrow; farewell; a pleasant evening to you.' He waited for
no reply, but hastened down-stairs.

When Emilius was alone, he tried to forget his anger, and to fix his attention on the laughable
side of his friend's behaviour. After a while his eyes rested upon the shining, finely-wrought
dagger, and he said: 'What must be the feelings of a man who could thrust this sharp iron into
the breast of an enemy! but oh, what must be those of one who could hurt a beloved object with
it! He locked it up, then gently folded back the shutters of his window, and looked across
the narrow street. But no light was there; all was dark in the opposite house; the dear form
that dwelt in it, and that used about this time to show herself at her household occupations,
seemed to be absent. 'Perhaps she is at the ball,' thought Emilius, little as it suited her
retired way of life.

Suddenly, however, a light entered; the little girl whom his beloved unknown had about her,
and with whom, during the day and evening, she busied herself in various ways, carried a candle
through the room, and closed the window-shutters. An opening remained light, large enough for
over-looking a part of the little chamber from the spot where Emilius stood; and there the
happy youth would often bide till after midnight, fixed as though he had been charmed there.
He was full of gladness when he saw her teaching the child to read, or instructing her in sewing
and knitting. Upon inquiry he had learnt that the little girl was a poor orphan whom his fair
maiden had charitably taken into the house to educate her. Emilius's friends could not conceive
why he lived in this narrow street, in this comfortless lodging, why he was so little to be
seen in society, or how he employed himself. Without employment, in solitude he was happy:
only he felt angry with himself and his own timidity and shyness, which kept him from venturing
to seek a nearer acquaintance with this fair being, notwithstanding the friendliness with which
on many occasions she had greeted and thanked him. He knew not that she would often bend over
him eyes no less love-sick than his own; nor boded what wishes were forming in her heart, of
what an effort, of what a sacrifice she felt herself capable, so she might but attain to the
possession of his love.

After walking a few times up and down the room, when the light had departed with the child,
he suddenly resolved upon going to the ball, though it was so against his inclination and his
nature; for it struck him that his Unknown might have made an exception to her quiet mode of
life, in order for once to enjoy the world, and its gaieties. The streets were brilliantly
lighted up, the snow crackled under his feet, carriages rolled by, and masks in every variety
of dress whistled and chirped as they passed him. From many a house there sounded the dancing-music
he so abhorred, and he could not bring himself to go the nearest way towards the ball-room,
whither people from every direction were streaming and thronging. He walked round the old church,
gazed at its lofty tower rising solemnly into the dark sky, and felt gladdened by the stillness
and loneliness of the remote square. Within the recess of a large door-way, the varied sculptures
of which he had always contemplated with pleasure, recollecting, while so engaged, the olden
times and the arts which adorned them, he now again paused, to give himself up for a few moments
to his thoughts. He had not stood long, before a figure drew his attention, which kept restlessly
walking to and fro, and seemed to be waiting for somebody. By the light of a lamp that was
burning before an image of the Virgin, he clearly distinguished its features as well as its
strange garb. It was an old woman of the uttermost hideousness, which struck the eye the more
from being brought out by its extravagant contrast with a scarlet bodice embroidered with gold;
the gown she wore was dark, and the cap on her head shone likewise with gold. Emilius fancied
at first it must be some tasteless mask that had strayed there by mistake; but he was soon
convinced by the clear light that the old, brown, wrinkled face was one of Nature's ploughing,
and no mimic exaggeration. Many minutes had not passed when there appeared two men, wrapped
up in cloaks, who seemed to approach the spot with cautions footsteps, often looking about
them, as if to observe whether anybody was following. The old woman walked up to them. 'Have
you got the candles?' asked she hastily, and with a gruff voice. 'Here they are,' said one
of the men; 'you know the price; let the matter be settled forthwith.' The old woman seemed
to be giving him money, which he counted over beneath his cloak. 'I rely upon you,' she again
began, 'that they are made exactly according to the prescription, at the right time and place,
so that the work cannot fail.' 'Feel safe as to that,' returned the man, and walked rapidly
away. The other, who remained behind, was a youth: he took the old woman by the hand, and said:
'Can it then be, Alexia, that such rites and forms of words, as those old stories, in which
I never could put faith, tell us, can fetter the free will of man, and make love and hatred
grow in the heart?' 'So it is,' answered the scarlet woman; 'but one and one must make two,
and many a one must be added thereto, before such things come to pass. It is not these candles
alone, moulded beneath the midnight darkness of the new moon, and drenched with human blood,
it is not the muttering magical words and invocations alone, that can give you the mastery
over the soul of another; much more than this belongs to such works; but it is all known to
the initiated.' 'I rely on you then,' said the stranger. 'To-morrow after midnight I am at
your service,' returned the old woman. 'You shall not be the first person that ever was dissatisfied
with the tidings I brought him. To-night, as you have heard, I have some one else in hand,
one whose senses and understanding our art shall twist about whichever way we choose, as easily
as I twist this hair out of my head.' These last words she uttered with a half grin: they now
separated, and withdrew in different directions.

Emilius came from the dark niche shuddering, and raised his looks upon the image of the Virgin
with the Child. 'Before thine eyes, thou mild and blessed one,' said he, half aloud, 'are these
miscreants daring to hold their market, and trafficking in their hellish drugs. But as thou
embracest thy Child with thy love, even so doth the unseen Love hold us all in its protecting
arms, and we feel their touch, and our poor hearts beat in joy and in trembling toward a greater
heart that will never forsake us.'

Clouds were wandering along over the pinnacles of the tower and the steep roof of the church;
the everlasting stars looked down from amongst them, sparkling with mild serenity; and Emilius
turned his thoughts resolutely away from these nightly horrors, and thought upon the beauty
of his Unknown. He again entered the living streets, and bent his steps toward the brightly
illuminated ball-room, whence voices, and the rattling of carriages, and now and then, between
the pauses, the clamorous music came sounding to his ears.

In the hall he was instantly lost amid the streaming throng; dancers sprang round him, masks
shot by him to and fro, kettle-drums and trumpets deafened his ears, and it was unto him as
though human life were nothing but a dream. He walked along the lines; his eye alone was watchful,
seeking for those beloved eyes and that fair head with its brown locks, for the sight of which
he yearned to-day even more intensely than at other times; and yet he inwardly reproached the
adored being for enduring to plunge into and lose itself in such a stormy sea of confusion
and folly. 'No,' said he to himself, 'no heart that loves can lay itself open to this waste
hubbub of noise, in which every longing and every tear of love is scoffed and mocked at by
the pealing laughter of wild trumpets. The whispering of trees, the murmuring of fountains,
harp-tones, and gentle song gushing forth from an overflowing bosom, are the sounds in which
love abides. But this is the very thundering and shouting of hell in the trance of its despair.'

He found not what he was seeking; for the belief that her beloved face might perchance be lying
hid behind some odious mask was what he could not possibly bring himself to. Thrice already
had he ranged up and down the hall, and had vainly passed in array every sitting and unmasked
female, when the Spaniard joined him and said: 'I am glad that after all you are come. You
seem to be looking for your friend.'

Emilius had quite forgotten him: he said, however, in some confusion: 'Indeed I wonder at not
having met him here; his mask is easily known.'

'Can you guess what the strange fellow is about?' answered the young officer. 'He did not dance,
or even remain half an hour in the ball-room; for he soon met with his friend Anderson, who
is just come from the country. Their conversation fell upon literature. As Anderson had not
yet seen the new poem, Roderick would not rest till they had opened one of the back rooms for
him; and there he now is, sitting with his companion beside a solitary taper, and declaiming
the whole poem to him, beginning with the invocation to the Muse.'

'It is just like him,' said Emilius; 'he is always the child of the moment. I have done all
in my power, not even shunning some amicable quarrels, to break him of this habit of always
living extempore, and playing away his whole being in impromptus, card after card, as it happens
to turn up, without once looking through his hand. But these follies have taken such deep root
in his heart, he would sooner part with his best friend than with them. That very same poem,
of which he is so fond that he always carries a copy of it in his pocket, he was desirous of
reading to me, and I had even urgently entreated him to do so; but we were scarcely over the
first description of the moon, when, just as I was resigning myself to an enjoyment of its
beauties, he suddenly jumped up, ran off, came back with the cook's apron round his waist,
tore down the bell-rope in ringing to have the fire lighted, and insisted on dressing me some
beef-steaks, for which I had not the least appetite, and of which he fancies himself the best
cook in Europe, though, if he is lucky, he spoils them only nine times out of ten.'

The Spaniard laughed, and asked: 'Has he never been in love?'

'In his way,' replied Emilius very gravely; 'as if he were making game both of love and of
himself, with a dozen women at a time, and, if you would believe his words, raving after every
one of them; but ere a week passes over his head they are all sponged out of it together, and
not even a blot of them remains.'

They parted in the crowd, and Emilius walked toward the remote apartment, whence already from
afar he heard his friend's loud recitative. 'Ah, so you are here too,' cried Roderick, as he
entered; 'that is just what it should be. I have got to the very passage at which we broke
down the other day; seat yourself, and you may listen to the rest.'

'I am not in a humour for it now,' said Emilius; 'besides, the room and the hour do not seem
to me altogether fitted for such an employment.'

'And why not?' answered Roderick. 'Time and place are made for us, and not we for time and
place. Is not good poetry as good at one place as at another? Or would you prefer dancing?
there is scarcity of men; and with the help of nothing more than a few hours' jumping and a
pair of tired legs, you may lay strong siege to the hearts of as many grateful beauties as
you please.'

'Good-bye!' cried the other, already in the door-way; 'I am going home.'

Roderick called after him: 'Only one word! I set off with this gentleman at daybreak to-morrow,
to spend a few days in the country, but will look in upon you to take leave before we start.
Should you be asleep, as is most likely, do not take the trouble of waking; for in a couple
of days I shall be with you again.--The strangest being on earth!' he continued, turning to
his new friend, 'so moping and fretful and gloomy, that he turns all his pleasures sour; or
rather there is no such thing as pleasure for him. Instead of walking about with his fellow-creatures
in broad daylight and enjoying himself, he gets down to the bottom of the well of his thoughts,
for the sake of now and then having a glimpse of a star. Everything must be in the superlative
for him; everything must be pure and noble and celestial; his heart must be always heaving
and throbbing, even when he is standing before a puppet-show. He never laughs or cries, but
can only smile and weep; and there is mighty little difference between his weeping and his
smiling. When anything, be it what you will, falls short of his anticipations and preconceptions,
which are always flying up out of reach and sight, he puts on a tragical face, and complains
that it is a base and soulless world. At this moment, I doubt not, he is exacting, that under
the masks of a Pantaloon and a Pulcinello there should be a heart glowing with unearthly desires
and ideal aspirations, and that Harlequin should out moralise Hamlet upon the nothingness of
sublunary things; and should it not be so, the dew will rise into his eyes, and he will turn
his back on the whole scene with desponding contempt.'

'He must be melancholic then?' asked his hearer.

'Not that exactly,' answered Roderick. 'He has only been spoilt by his over-fond parents, and
by himself. He has accustomed himself to let his heart ebb and flow as regularly as the sea,
and if this motion ever chances to intermit, he cries out miracle! and would offer a prize
to the genius that can satisfactorily explain so marvellous a phenomenon. He is the best fellow
under the sun; but all my painstaking to break him of this perverseness is utterly vain and
thrown away; and if I would not earn sorry thanks for my good intentions, I must even let him
follow his own course.'

'He seems to need a physician,' remarked Anderson.

'It is one of his whims,' said Roderick, 'to entertain a supreme contempt for the whole medical
art. He will have it that every disease is something different and distinct in every patient,
that it can be brought under no class, and that it is absurd to think of healing it, either
by attention to ancient practice or by what is called theory. Indeed he would much rather apply
to an old woman, and make use of sympathetic cures. On the same principle, he despises all
foresight, on whatever occasion, as well as everything like regularity, moderation, and common
sense. The last above all he holds in especial abhorrence, as the antipodes and arch-enemy
of all enthusiasm. From his very childhood he framed for himself an ideal of a noble character;
and his highest aim is to render himself what he considers such, that is, a being who shows
his superiority to all things earthy by his contempt for gold. Merely in order that he may
not be suspected of being parsimonious, or giving unwillingly, or ever talking about money,
he tosses it about him right and left by handfuls; with all his large income is for ever poor
and distressed, and becomes the fool of everybody not endowed with precisely the same kind
of magnanimity, which for himself he is determined that he will have. To be his friend is the
undertaking of all undertakings; for he is so irritable, one need only cough or eat with one's
knife, or even pick one's teeth, to offend him mortally.'

'Was he never in love?' asked his country friend.

'Whom should he love? whom could he love?' answered Roderick. 'He scorns all the daughters
of earth; and were he ever to suspect that his beloved had not an angelical contempt for dress,
or liked dancing as well as star-gazing, it would break his heart; still more appalling would
it be, if she were ever so unfortunate as to sneeze.'

Meanwhile Emilius was again standing amid the throng; but suddenly there came over him that
uneasiness, that shivering, which had already so often seized his heart when among a crowd
in a state of similar excitement; it chased him out of the ball-room and house, down along
the deserted streets; nor, till he reached his lonely chamber, did he recover himself and the
quiet possession of his senses. The night-light was already kindled; he sent his servant to
bed; everything in the opposite house was silent and dark; and he sat down to pour forth in
verse the feelings which had been aroused by the ball.

      Within the heart 'tis still;
    Sleep each wild thought encages;
      Now stirs a wicked will,
    Would see how madness rages.
      And cries, Wild Spirit, awake!
    Loud cymbals catch the cry
      And back its echoes shake;
    And shouting peals of laughter,
    The trumpet rushes after,
      And cries, Wild Spirit, awake!
    Amidst them flute tones fly,
    Like arrows keen and numberless;
      And with bloodhound yell
      Pipes the onset swell;
    And violins and violoncellos,
      Creeking, clattering,
      Shrieking and shattering;
    And horns whence thunder bellows;
    To leave the victim slumberless,
    And drag forth prisoned madness,
    And cruelly murder all quiet and innocent gladness.
    What will be the end of this commotion?
    Where the shore to this turmoiling ocean?
    What seeks the tossing throng,
    As it wheels and whirls along?
      On! on! the lustres
    Like hell-stars bicker:
      Let us twine in closer clusters.
    On! on! ever thicker and quicker!
    How the silly things throb, throb amain!
      Hence, all quiet!
      Hither, riot!
      Peal more proudly,
      Squeal more loudly,
    Ye cymbals, ye trumpets! Be-dull all pain,
    Till it laugh again.

    Thou becomest to me, beauty's daughter;
        Smiles ripple over thy lips,
    And o'er thine eyes blue water;
      O let me breathe on thee,
      Ere parted hence we flee.
        Ere aught that light eclipse.
    I know that beauty's flowers soon wither;
      Those lips within whose rosy cells
      Thy spirit warbles its sweet spells,
    Death's clammy kiss ere long will press together.
      I know, that face so fair and full
      Is but a masquerading skull;
    But hail to thee, skull so fair and so fresh!
      Why should I weep and whine and wail,
      That what blooms now must soon grow pale,
    That worms must feed on that sweet flesh?
      Let me laugh but to-day and to-morrow,
      And I care not for sorrow,
    While thus on the waves of the dance by each other we sail!

      Now thou art mine
      And I am thine:
    And what though pain and sorrow wait
      To seize thee at the gate,
    And sob and tear and groan and sigh
      Stand ranged in state
    On thee to fly;
      Blithely let us look and cheerily
      On death, that grins so drearily.
    What would grief with us, or anguish?
    They are foes that we know how to vanquish.
      I press thine answering fingers,
      Thy look upon me lingers,
    Or the fringe of thy garment will waft me a kiss:
      Thou rollest on in light;
      I fall back into night;
    Even despair is bliss.

      From this delight,
    From this wild laughter's surge,
    Perchance there may emerge
      Foul jealousy and scorn and spite.
    But this our glory! and pride!
          When thee I despise,
        I turn but mine eyes,
      And the fair one beside thee will welcome my gaze;
    And she is my bride;
      Oh, happy, happy days!
    Or shall it be her neighbour,
    Whose eyes like a sabre
    Flash and pierce,
    Their glance is so fierce?

    Thus capering and prancing,
    All together go dancing
      Adown life's giddy cave;
    Nor living nor loving,
    But dizzily roving
      Through dreams to a grave.
    There below 'tis yet worse;
      Its flowers and its clay
      Roof a gloomier day,
    Hide a still deeper curse.
    Ring then, ye cymbals, enliven this dream!
    Ye horns, shout a fiercer, more vulture-like scream!
    And jump, caper, leap, prance, dance yourselves out of breath!
      For your life is all art;
      Love has given you no heart:
    Therefore shout till ye plunge into bottomless death.

He had ended and was standing at the window. Then came she into the opposite chamber, lovely,
as he had never yet seen her; her brown hair floated freely and played in wanton ringlets about
the whitest of necks; she was but lightly clad, and it seemed as though she was about to finish
some household task at this late hour of the night before going to bed; for she placed two
lights in two corners of the room, set to rights the green baize on the table, and again retired.
Emilius was still sunk in his sweet dreams, and gazing on the image which his beloved had left
on his mind, when to his horror the fearful, the scarlet old woman walked through the chamber;
the gold on her head and breast glared ghastlily as it threw back the light. She had vanished
again. Was he to believe his eyes? Was it not some blinding deception of the night, some spectre
that his own feverish imagination had conjured up before him? But no! she returned still more
hideous than before, with a long gray-and-black mane flying wildly and ruggedly about her breast
and back. The fair maiden followed her, pale, frozen up; her lovely bosom was without a covering;
but the whole form was like a marble statue. Betwixt them they led the little sweet child,
weeping and clinging entreatingly to the fair maiden, who looked not down upon it. The child
clasped and lifted up its little beseeching hands, and stroked the pale neck and cheeks of
the marble beauty. But she held it fast by the hair, and in the other hand a silver basin.
Then the old woman gave a growl, and pulled out a long knife, and drew it across the white
neck of the child. Here something wound forth from behind them, which they seemed not to perceive;
or it must have produced in them the same deep horror as in Emilius. The ghastly neck of a
serpent curled forth, scale after scale, lengthening and ever lengthening out of the darkness,
and stooped down between them over the child, whose lifeless limbs hung from the old woman's
arms; its black tongue licked up the spirting red blood, and a green sparkling eye shot over
into Emilius's eye, and brain, and heart, so that he fell at the same instant to the ground.

He was senseless when found by Roderick some hours after.

       *       *       *       *       *

A party of friends was sitting, on the brightest summer morning, in a green arbour, assembled
round an excellent breakfast. Laughter and jests passed round, and many a time did the glasses
kiss with a merry health to the youthful couple, and a wish that they might be the happiest
of the happy. The bride and bridegroom were not present; the fair one being still busied about
her dress, while the young husband was sauntering alone in a distant avenue, musing upon his
happiness.

'What a pity,' said Anderson, 'that we are to have no music. All our ladies are beclouded at
the thought, and never in their whole lives longed for a dance so much as to-day, when to have
one is quite out of the question. It is far too painful to his feelings.'

'I can tell you a secret though,' said a young officer; 'which is, that we are to have a dance
after all, and a rare madcap and riotous one it will he. Everything is already arranged; the
musicians are come secretly, and quartered out of sight. Roderick has managed it all; for he
says, one ought not to let him have his own way, or to humour his strange prejudices over-much,
especially on such a day as this. Besides, he is already grown far more like a human being,
and is much more sociable than he used to be; so that I think even he will not dislike this
alteration. Indeed, the whole wedding has been brought about all of a sudden, in a way that
nobody could have expected.'

'His whole life,' said Anderson, 'is no less singular than his character. You must all remember
how, being engaged on his travels, he arrived last autumn in our city, fixed himself there
for the winter, lived like a melancholy man, scarcely ever leaving his room, and never gave
himself the least trouble about our theatre or any other amusement. He almost quarrelled with
Roderick, his most intimate friend, for trying to divert him, and not pampering him in all
his moping humours. In fact, this exaggerated irritability and moodiness must have been a disease
that was gathering in his body; for, as you know, he was seized four months since with a most
violent nervous fever, so that we were all forced to give him up for lost. After his fancies
had raved themselves out, on returning to his senses, he had almost entirely lost his memory;
his childhood, indeed, and his early youth were still present to his mind, but he could not
recollect anything that had occurred during his travels, or immediately before his illness.
He was forced to begin anew his acquaintance with all his friends, even with Roderick; and
only by little and little has it grown lighter with him; but slowly has the past with all that
had befallen him come again, though still in dim colours, over his memory. He had been removed
into his uncle's house, that the better care might be taken of him, and he was like a child,
letting them do with him whatever they chose. The first time he went out to enjoy the warmth
of spring in the park, he saw a girl sitting thoughtfully by the road-side. She looked up;
her eye met his; and, as it were seized with an unaccountable yearning, he bade the carriage
stop, got out, sat down by her, took hold of her hands, and poured himself forth in a full
stream of tears. His friends were again alarmed for his understanding; but he grew tranquil,
lively and conversable, got introduced to the girl's parents, and at the very first besought
her hand; which, as her parents did not refuse their consent, she granted him. Thenceforward
he was happy, and a new life sprang up within him; every day he became healthier and more cheerful.
A week ago he visited me at this country-seat of mine, and was above measure delighted with
it; indeed so much so that he would not rest till he had made me sell it to him. I might easily
have turned his passionate wish to my own good account, and to his injury; for, whenever he
sets his heart on a thing, he will have it, and that forthwith. He immediately made his arrangements,
and had furniture brought hither that he may spend the summer months here; and in this way
it has come to pass that we are all now assembled together to celebrate our friend's marriage
at this villa, which a few days since belonged to me.'

The house was large, and situated in a very lovely country. One side looked down upon a river,
and beyond it upon pleasant hills, clad and girt round with shrubs and trees of various kinds;
immediately before it lay a beautiful flower-garden. Here the orange and lemon trees were ranged
in a large open hall, from which small doors led to the store-rooms and cellars, and pantries.
On the other side spread the green plain of a meadow, which was immediately bordered by a large
park; here the two long wings of the house formed a spacious court; and three broad, open galleries,
supported by rows of pillars standing above each other, connected all the apartments in the
building, which gave it on this side an interesting and singular character; for figures were
continually moving along these arcades in the discharge of their various household tasks; new
forms kept stepping forth between the pillars and out of every room, which reappeared soon
after above or below, to be lost behind some other doors; the company too would often assemble
there for tea or for play; and thus, when seen from below, the whole had the look of a theatre,
before which everybody would gladly pause awhile, expecting, as his fancies wandered, that
something strange or pleasing would soon be taking place above.

The party of young people were just rising, when the full-dressed bride came through the garden
and walked up to them. She was clad in violet-coloured velvet; a sparkling necklace lay cradled
on her white neck; the costly lace just allowed her swelling bosom to glimmer through; her
brown hair was tinged yet more beautifully by its wreath of myrtles and white roses. She addressed
each in turn with a kind greeting, and the young men were astonished at her surpassing beauty.
She had been gathering flowers in the garden, and was now returning into the house, to see
after the preparations for the dinner. The tables had been placed in the lower open gallery,
and shone dazzlingly with their white coverings and their load of sparkling crystal; rich clusters
of many-coloured flowers rose from the graceful necks of alabaster vases; green garlands, starred
with white blossoms, twined round the columns; and it was a lovely sight to behold the bride
gliding along with gentle motion between the tables and the pillars, amid the light of the
flowers, overlooking the whole with a searching glance, then vanishing, and re-appearing a
moment afterwards higher up to pass into her chamber.

'She is the loveliest and most enchanting creature I ever saw,' cried Anderson; 'our friend
is indeed the happiest of men.'

'Even her paleness,' said the officer, taking up the word, 'heightens her beauty. Her brown
eyes sparkle only more intensely above those white cheeks, and beneath those dark locks; and
the singular, almost burning, redness of her lips gives a truly magical appearance to her face.'

'The air of silent melancholy that surrounds her,' said Anderson, 'sheds a lofty majesty over
her whole form.'

The bridegroom joined them, and inquired after Roderick. They had all missed him some time
since, and could not conceive where he could be tarrying; and they all set out in search of
him. 'He is below in the hall,' said at length a young man whom they happened to ask, 'in the
midst of the coachmen, footmen, and grooms, showing off tricks at cards, which they cannot
grow tired of staring at.' They went in, and interrupted the noisy admiration of the servants,
without, however, disturbing Roderick, who quietly pursued his conjuring exhibition. When he
had finished, he walked with the others into the garden, and said, 'I do it only to strengthen
the fellows in their faith: for these puzzles give a hard blow to their groomships' free-thinking
inclinations, and help to make them true believers.'

'I see,' said the bridegroom, 'my all-sufficing friend, among his other talents, does not think
that of a mountebank beneath his cultivation.'

'We live in a strange time,' replied the other. 'Who knows whether mountebanks may not come
to rule the roost in their turn. One ought to despise nothing nowadays: the veriest straw of
talent may be that which is to break the camel's back.'

When the two friends found themselves alone, Emilius again turned down the dark avenue, and
said, 'Why am I in such a gloomy mood on this the happiest day of my life? But I assure you,
Roderick, little as you will believe it, I am not made for this moving about among such a mob
of human beings; for this keeping my attention on the qui vive for every letter of the alphabet,
so that neither A nor Z may go without all fitting respect; for this making a bow to her tenth,
and shaking hands with my twentieth; for this rendering of formal homage to her parents; for
this handing a flower from my nosegay of compliments to every lady that crosses my eye; for
this waiting to receive the tide of newcomers as wave after wave rushes over me, and then turning
to give orders that their servants and horses may have each a full trough and pail set before
them.'

'That is a watch that goes of its own accord,' answered Roderick. 'Only look at your house,
it was just built for such an occasion; and your head-butler, with his right hand taking up
at the same time that his left is setting down, and one leg running north while the other seems
to be making for south, was begotten and born for no other end than to put confusion in order.
He would even set my brains to rights if he could get at them; were the whole city here he
would find room for all; and he will make your hospitality the proverb of fifty miles round.
Leave all such things to him and to your lovely bride; and where will you find so sweet a lightener
of this world's cares?'

'This morning before sunrise,' said Emilius, 'I was walking through the wood; my thoughts were
solemnly tuned, and I felt to the bottom of my soul that my life was now receiving its determinate
character, that it was become a serious thing, and that this passion had created for me a home
and a calling. I passed along by that arbour there, and heard sounds: it was my beloved in
close conversation. "Has it not turned out now as I told you?" said a strange voice; "just
as I knew it must turn out. You have got your wish, so cheer up and be merry." I would not
go near them; afterwards I walked toward the arbour, but they had both already left it. Since
then I keep thinking and thinking, what can these words mean?'

Roderick answered: 'Perhaps she may have been in love with you for some time without your knowing
it; you are only so much the happier.'

A late nightingale here upraised her song, and seemed to be wishing the lover health and bliss.
Emilius became more thoughtful. 'Come down with me, to cheer up your spirits,' said Roderick,
'down to the village, where you will find another couple; for you must not fancy that yours
is the only wedding on which to-day's sun is to shine. A young clown, finding his time wear
heavily in the house with an ugly old maid, for want of something better to do, did what makes
the booby now think himself bound in honour to transform her into his wife. By this time they
must both be already dressed, so let us not miss the sight; for doubtless, it will be a most
interesting wedding.'

The melancholy man let himself be dragged along by his lively chattering friend, and they soon
came to the cottage. The procession was just sallying forth, to go to the church. The young
countryman was in his usual linen frock; all his finery consisted in a pair of leather breeches,
which he had polished till they shone like a field of dandelions; he was of simple mien, and
appeared somewhat confused. The bride was sun-burnt, with but a few farewell leaves of youth
still hanging about her; she was coarsely and poorly, but cleanly dressed; some red and blue
silk ribbons, already a good deal faded; but what chiefly disfigured her was, that her hair,
stiffened with lard, flour, and pins, had been swept back from her forehead, and piled up at
the top of her head in a mound, on the summit of which lay the bridal chaplet. She smiled and
seemed glad at heart, but was shamefaced and downcast. Next came the aged parents; the father
too was only a servant about the farm, and the hovel, the furniture, and the clothing, all
bore witness that their poverty was extreme. A dirty, squinting musician followed the train,
who kept grinning and screaming, and scratching his fiddle, which was patched together of wood
and pasteboard, and instead of strings had three bits of pack-thread. The procession halted
when his honour, their new master, came up to them. Some mischief-loving servants, young lads
and girls, tittered and laughed, and jeered the bridal couple, especially the ladies' maids,
who thought themselves far handsomer, and saw themselves infinitely better clad, and wondered
how people could be so vulgar. A shuddering came over Emilius; he looked round for Roderick,
but the latter had already run away from him again. An impertinent coxcomb, with a head pilloried
in his high starched neck-cloth, a servant to one of the visitors, eager to show his wit, pressed
up to Emilius, giggling, and cried: 'Now, your honour, what says your honour to this grand
couple? They can neither of them guess where they are to find bread for to-morrow, and yet
they mean to give a ball this afternoon, and that famous performer there is already engaged.'
'No bread!' said Emilius; 'can such things be?' 'Their wretchedness,' continued the chatterbox,
'is known to the whole neighbourhood; but the fellow says he bears the creature the same good-will,
although she is such a sorry bit of clay. Ay, verily, as the song says, love can make black
white! The couple of baggages have not even a bed, and must pass their wedding night on the
straw. They have just been round to every house begging a pint of small beer, with which they
mean to get drunk; a royal treat for a wedding day, your honour!' Everybody round about laughed
loudly, and the unhappy, despised pair cast down their eyes. Emilius indignantly pushed the
chatterer away. 'Here, take this!' he cried, and threw a hundred ducats, which he had received
that morning, into the hands of the amazed bridegroom. The betrothed couple and their parents
wept aloud, threw themselves clumsily on their knees, and kissed his hands and the skirts of
his coat. He tried to make his escape. 'Let that keep hunger out of your doors as long as it
lasts!' he exclaimed, quite stunned by his feelings. 'Oh!' they all screamed, 'oh, your honour!
we shall be rich and happy till the day of our deaths, and longer too, if we live longer.'

He knew not how he got away from them; but he found himself alone, and hastened with unsteady
steps into the wood. Here he sought out the thickest, loneliest spot, and threw himself down
on a grassy knoll, no longer keeping back the bursting stream of his tears. 'I am sick of life,'
he sobbed; 'I cannot be glad and happy, I will not. Make haste and receive me, thou dear kind
earth, and hide me in thy cool, refreshing arms from the wild beasts that tread over thee and
call themselves men. Oh, God in heaven! how have I deserved that I should rest upon down and
wear silk, that the grape should pour forth her most precious blood for me, and that all should
throng around me and offer me their homage and love? This poor wretch is better and worthier
than I, and misery is his nurse, and mockery and venomous scorn are the only sounds that hail
his wedding. Every delicacy that is placed before me, every draught out of my costly goblets,
my lying on soft beds, my wearing gold and rich garments, will be unto me like so many sins,
now that I have beheld how the world hunts down many thousand thousand wretches, who are hungering
after the dry bread that I throw away, and who never know what a good meal is. Oh, now I can
fully understand your feelings, ye holy pious, whom the world despises and scorns and scoffs
at, who scatter abroad your all, even unto the raiment of your poverty, and did gird sack-cloth
about your loins, and did resolve as beggars to endure the gibes and the kicks wherewith brutal
insolence and swilling voluptuousness drive away misery from their tables, that by so doing
ye might thoroughly purge yourselves from the foul sin of wealth.'

The world, with all its forms of being, hung in a mist before his eyes; he determined to look
upon the destitute as his brethren, and to depart far away from the communion of the happy.
They had already been waiting for him a long time in the hall, to perform the ceremony; the
bride had become uneasy; her parents had gone in search of him through the garden and park;
at length he returned, lighter for having wept away his cares, and the solemn knot was tied.

The company then walked from the lower hall toward the open gallery, to seat themselves at
table. The bride and bridegroom led the way, and the rest followed in their train. Roderick
offered his arm to a young girl who was gay and talkative. 'Why does a bride always cry, and
look so sad and serious during the ceremony,' said she, as they mounted the steps.

'Because it is the first moment in which she feels intensely all the weight and meaning and
mystery of life,' answered Roderick.

'But our bride,' continued the girl, 'far surpasses in gravity all I have ever yet seen. Indeed,
she almost always looks melancholy, and one can never catch her in a downright hearty laugh.'

'This does more honour to her heart,' answered Roderick, himself, contrary to custom, feeling
somewhat seriously disposed. 'You know not, perhaps, that the bride a few years ago took a
lovely little orphan girl into the house, to educate her. All her time was devoted to the child,
and the love of this gentle being was her sweetest reward. The girl was become seven years
old, when she was lost during a walk through the town, and in spite of all the means that have
been employed, nobody could ever find out what became of her. Our noble-minded hostess has
taken this misfortune so much to heart that she has been preyed upon ever since by a silent
melancholy, nor can anything win her away from her longing after her little play-fellow.'

'A most interesting adventure, indeed,' said the lady. 'One might see a whole romance in three
volumes grow out of this seed. It will be a strange sight, and it will not be for nothing,
when this lost star reappears. What a pretty poem it would make! Don't you think so, sir?'

The party arranged themselves at table. The bride and bridegroom sat in the centre, and looked
out upon the gay landscape. They talked and drank healths, and the most cheerful humour reigned;
the bride's parents were quite happy; the bridegroom alone was reserved and thoughtful, eat
but little, and took no part in the conversation. He started when some musical sounds rolled
down from above, but grew calm again on finding it was nothing but the soft notes of a bugle,
which wandered along with a pleasant murmur over the shrubs and through the park, till they
died away on the distant hills. Roderick had stationed the musicians in the gallery overhead,
and Emilius was satisfied with this arrangement. Toward the end of the dinner he called his
butler, and turning to his bride, said, 'My love, let poverty also have a share of our superfluities.'
He then ordered him to send several bottles of wine, some pastry, and other dishes in abundant
portions, to the poor couple, so that with them also this day might be a day of rejoicing,
unto which in after-times they might look back with delight. 'See, my friend,' cried Roderick,
'how beautifully all things in this world hang together. My idle trick of busying myself about
other people's concerns, and my chattering, though you are for ever finding fault with them,
have after all been the occasion of this good deed.' Several persons began making pretty speeches
to their host on his compassion and kind heart, and the young lady next to Roderick lisped
about romantic feelings and sentimental magnanimity. 'O, hold your tongues,' cried Emilius
indignantly. 'This is no good action; it is no action at all; it is nothing. When swallows
and linnets feed themselves with the crumbs that are thrown away from the waste of this meal,
and carry them to their young ones in their nests, shall not I remember a poor brother who
needs my help? If I durst follow my heart, ye would laugh and jeer at me, just as ye have laughed
and jeered at many others who have gone forth into the wilderness, that they might hear no
more of this world and its generosity.'

Everybody was silent, and Roderick, perceiving the most vehement displeasure in his friend's
glowing eyes, feared he might forget himself still more in his present ungracious mood, and
tried to give the conversation a sudden turn upon other subjects. But Emilius was becoming
restless and absent; his eyes were continually wandering toward the upper gallery, where the
servants who lived in the top story had many things to do.

'Who is that ugly old woman,' he at length asked, 'that is so busy there, going backwards and
forwards, in her gray cloak?' 'She is one of my attendants,' said his bride; 'she is to overlook
and manage my waiting-maids and the other girls.' 'How can you bear to have anything so hideous
always at your elbow?' replied Emilius. 'Let her alone,' answered the young lady; 'God meant
the ugly to live as well as the handsome: and she is such a good, honest creature, she may
be of great use to us.'

On rising from table, everybody pressed round the new husband, again wished him joy, and urgently
begged that he would consent to their having a ball. The bride too said, breathing a gentle
kiss on his forehead: 'You will not deny your wife's first request, my beloved; we have all
been looking forward with delight to this moment. It is so long since I danced last, and you
have never yet seen me dance. Have you no curiosity how I shall acquit myself in this new character?
My mother tells me I look better than at any other time.'

'I never saw you thus cheerful,' said Emilius; 'I will be no disturber of your joys: do just
what you please; only let me bargain for nobody asking me to make myself ridiculous by any
clumsy capers.'

'Oh, if you are a bad dancer,' she answered, laughing, 'you may feel quite safe; everybody
will readily consent to your sitting still.' The bride then retired to put on her ball-dress.

'She does not know,' said Emilius to Roderick, with whom he withdrew, 'that I can pass from
the next room into hers through a secret door; I will surprise her while she is dressing.'

When Emilius had left them, and many of the ladies were also gone to make such changes in their
attire as were necessary for the ball, Roderick took the young men aside, and led the way to
his own room. 'It is wearing toward evening,' said he, 'and will soon be dark; so make haste,
every one of you, and mask yourselves, that we may render this night glorious in the annals
of merriment and madness. Give your fancies free range in choosing your characters: the wilder
and uglier the better. Try every combination of shaggy mane, and squinting eye, and mouth like
a gaping volcano; build mountains upon your shoulders, or fatten yourselves into Falstaffs;
and as a whet to your inventions, I hereby promise a kiss from the bride to the figure that
would be the likeliest to make her miscarry. A wedding is such a strange event in one's life;
the bride and bridegroom are so suddenly plunged, as it were by magic, head over heels into
a new, unaccustomed element, that it is impossible to infuse too much of madness and folly
into this feast, in order to keep pace with the whirlpool that is bearing a brace of human
beings from the state in which they were two, into the state in which they become one, and
to let all things round about them be fit accompaniments for the dizzy dream on the wings of
which they are floating toward a new life. So let us rave away the night, making all sail before
the breeze; and a fig for such as look twice on the grave sour faces that would have you behave
rationally.'

'Don't be afraid,' said the young officer; 'we have brought from town with us a large chest
full of masks and mad carnival dresses, such as would make even you stare.'

'But see here,' returned Roderick, 'what a gem I have got from my tailor, who was just going
to cut up this peerless robe into strips. He bought it of an old crone, who must doubtless
have worn it on gala days when she went to Lucifer's drawing-room on the Blocksberg. Look at
this scarlet bodice, with its gold tassels and fringe, at this cap besmeared with the last
fee the hag got from Beelzebub or his imps: it will give me a right worshipful air. To match
such jewels, there is this green velvet petticoat with its saffron-coloured trimming, and this
mask would melt even Medusa to a grin. Thus accoutred I mean to lead the chorus of Graces,
myself their mother-queen, toward the bed-chamber. Make all the haste you can; and we will
then go in procession to fetch the bride.'

The bugles were still playing; the company were walking about the garden, or sitting before
the house. The sun had gone down behind thick, murky clouds, and the country was lying in the
gray dusk, when a parting gleam suddenly burst forth athwart the cloudy veil, and flooded every
spot around, but especially the building, and its galleries, and pillars, and wreaths of flowers,
as it were with red blood. At this moment the parents of the bride and the other spectators
beheld a train of the wildest appearances move toward the upper corridor. Roderick led the
way as the scarlet old woman, and was followed by hump-backs, mountain-paunches, massy wigs,
clowns, punches, skeleton-like pantaloons, female figures embanked by enormous hoops and over-canopied
with three feet of horsehair, powder and pomatum, and by every disgusting shape that can be
conceived, as though a nightmare were unrolling her stores. They jumped, and twirled, and tottered,
and stumbled, and straddled, and strutted, and swaggered along the gallery, and then vanished
behind one of the doors. But few of the beholders had been able to laugh: so utterly were they
amazed by the strange sight. Suddenly a piercing shriek burst from one of the rooms, and there
rushed forth into the blood-red glow of the sunset the pale bride, in a short white frock,
round which wreaths of flowers were waving, with her lovely bosom all uncovered, and her rich
locks streaming through the air. As though mad, with rolling eyes and distorted face, she darted
along the gallery, and, blinded by terror, could find neither door nor staircase; and immediately
after rushed Emilius in chase of her, with the sparkling Turkish dagger in his high, upraised
hand. Now she was at the end of the passage; she could go no further; he reached her. His masked
friends and the gray old woman were running after him. But he had already furiously pierced
her bosom, and cut through her white neck; her blood spouted forth into the radiance of the
setting sun. The old woman had clasped round him to tear him back; he struggled with her, and
hurled himself together with her over the railing, and they both fell, almost lifeless, down
at the feet of the relations who had been staring in dumb horror at the bloody scene. Above
and below, or hastening down the stairs and along the galleries, were seen the hideous masks,
standing or running about in various clusters, like fiends of hell.

Roderick took his dying friend in his arms. He had found him in his wife's room playing with
the dagger. She was almost dressed when he entered. At the sight of the hated red bodice his
memory had rekindled; the horrible vision of the night had risen upon his mind; and gnashing
his teeth he had sprung after his trembling flying bride, to avenge that murder and all those
devilish doings. The old woman, ere she expired, confessed the crime that had been wrought;
and the gladness and mirth of the whole house were suddenly changed into sorrow and lamentation
and dismay.

LUDWIG TIECK.

The author of the foregoing tale, Ludwig Tieck, has lately been introduced to the English reader
by an admirable translation of his two exquisite little novels, The Pictures and The Betrothing.
He is one among the great German writers who made their appearance during the last ten years
of the eighteenth century; a period--whether from any extraordinary productiveness in the power
that regulates the seed-time and the harvests of the human race, or from the mighty excitements
and stimulants wherewith the world was then teeming--among the richest in the blossoming of
genius. For not to mention the great military talents first developed in those days, among
the holders of which were he who conquered all the continent of Europe, and he before whom
that conqueror fell; turning away from the many rank but luxuriant weeds that sprang up in
France, after all its plains had been manured with blood; and fixing the eye solely upon literary
excellence, we find in our own country, that the chief part of those men by whom we may hope
that the memory of our days will be transmitted to posterity as a thing precious and to be
held in honour, that Wordsworth, and Coleridge, and Southey, and Lamb, and Landor, and Scott,
put forth during those ten years the first-fruits of their minds; while in Germany, the same
period was rendered illustrious by Fichte and John Paul Richter at its commencement, and subsequently
by Schelling, and Hegel, and Steffens, Schleiermacher, and the Schlegels, and Novalis, and
Tieck. Of this noble brotherhood, who all, I believe, studied at the same university, that
of Jena, and who were all bound together by friendship, by affinity of genius, and by unity
of aim, the two latter, Novalis and Tieck, were the poets: for though there are several things
of great poetical beauty in the works of the Schlegels, their fame, upon the whole, rests on
a different basis. The lovely dreamy mind of Novalis was cut off in the full promise of its
spring; it only just awoke from the blissful visions of its childhood, to breathe forth a few
lyrical murmurs about the mysteries it had been brooding over, and then fell asleep again.
Upon Tieck, therefore, the character of German poetry in the age following those of Goethe
and Schiller will mainly depend: and never did Norwegian or Icelandic spring burst forth more
suddenly than the youth of Ludwig Tieck. I know not in the whole history of literature, any
poet who can count up so many and so great exploits achieved on his first descent into the
arena: in number and variety even Goethe must yield the precedence, though his youthful triumphs
were Goetz of Berlichingen and Werther. There was in Tieck's early works the promise, and far
more than the promise, of the greatest dramatic poet whom Europe had seen since the days of
Calderon; there was a rich, elastic, buoyant, comic spirit, not like the analytical reflection,
keen biting wit of Molière and Congreve, and other comic writers of the satirical school, but
like the living merriment, the uncontrollable, exuberant joyousness, the humour arising from
good humour, not, as it often does, from ill humour, the incarnation, so to say, of the principle
of mirth, in Shakespeare, and Cervantes, and Aristophanes; and as a wreath of flowers to crown
the whole, there was the heavenly purity and starlike loveliness of his Genoveva. Had the rest
of Tieck's life kept pace with the fertility of the six years from 1798 to 1804, he must have
been beyond all rivalry the second of German poets; and as Eschylus in the Frogs shares his
supremacy with Sophocles, so would Goethe have invited Tieck to sit beside him on his throne.
Unfortunately for those who would have feasted upon his fruits, the poet, during the last twenty
years, has been so weighed down by almost unintermitting ill health, that he has published
but little. There was a short interval indeed that seemed to bid fairer, about the year 1812,
when he began to collect his tales and lesser dramas, on a plan something like that of the
Decameron, in the Phantasm, but it has not yet been carried beyond the second reign, out of
seven through which it was designed to extend. Of that collection the chief part had been known
to the world ten or twelve years before: some things, however, appeared then for the first
time, and among them, I believe, was the tale of The Love-Charm. Latterly, Tieck's genius has
taken a new spring, in a somewhat different direction from that of his youth. He has written
half a dozen novels, in the manner of the couple recently translated; nor are the others of
less excellence than those two; a beautiful tale of magic has also been just published; and
the speedy appearance of several other things that have employed him during the long period
of seeming inactivity, is promised; wherein he has been engaged more or less for above a quarter
of a century, and to gather materials for which he some years since visited England. Of this
work the highest expectations may justly be formed: not many people, even, in this country,
possess a more extensive and accurate acquaintance with our ancient drama than Tieck; no one
has entered more fully into the spirit of its great poets, than Tieck has shown himself to
have done in the prefaces to his Old English Theatre and his Shakespeare's Vorschule; few have
ever bestowed such attention on the history of the stage in all countries, or have so studied
the principles of dramatic composition and the nature of dramatic effect; hardly any one, I
may say no one, ever learnt so much from Shakespeare: no one, therefore, can have more to teach
us about him; and to judge from the remarks on some of the plays which have already been printed
in the Abendzeitung, no one was ever so able to trace out the most secret workings of the great
master's mind, or to retain his full, calm self-possession when following him on his highest
flights; no one ever united in such perfection the great critic with the great poet. The wine flows heavily
in our people more miserable. Hens, animated by a sacred fire would have said that lay eggs cooked
and everything. The lambs are born roasts. Spain eats and drinks at home.

What are the socialists who criticize Mr. Maura by the Spanish people take on this blessing
of a general election? As the decree of dissolution is delayed a few months more, and how expensive
is the life, Spain will starve. It should end this Legend has it that a candidate is not important
rather than as a potential member. The important thing is not the deputy, but the candidate. The
important thing is not Parliament but the election period. A man who is left in a district of fifty
thousand dollars up is undoubtedly a man who favors the district, and the people, grateful,
should vote for him ...

Unless the candidate is left hand bend.

III

LETTER

A reader sent me the following letter:

"Mr. D. Julio Camba.

Dear Sir: Your article on the elections, published in The Sun on 13, contains several inaccuracies
that I hasten to rectify. You say that the votes are in Spain a major industry. Oh, Mr. Camba!
Like many others, this industry has been here considerably less. The crowd is terrible. Some people
sell their votes for two dollars. There are those who give in exchange for a meal, a leisurely
drive or a cigar. Some people vote for friendship and there is something much worse: some people vote
for political convictions. And this explains that men as candidates who have nowhere to fall dead.

I
think it should be a league of voters by imposing a minimum rate for votes. This would, in
my view, the only practical way to enforce that citizens did our rights. Five dollars per vote,
and if candidates do not accept, we would go on strike.

And do not talk to me of immorality. The fact that you charge your articles does not mean you
sell your ideas. In fact, one writer has no real independence of thought while it can not live
by his pen, and some of this is also true with voters.

Do you know what I had to do in the last election to value my right a little voter? Then I had
to vote twice: once for a candidate monarchy, and other, a Republican.

Because that for candidates who pay more conservative votes, it is
not accurate, Mr. Camba.

When in power, what need have to pay? Generally, not even bother to throw us a speech.

Undeceive you.

To raise a little industry there is no electoral procedure League. Recently there was talk of salary to
the deputies noted. Very well, but that Members start by paying their
constituents.

And while there are people who vote for nothing, I I can not believe that the right to vote
for the people representing conquest no ... "

So far the letter of my correspondent. I, as proof of fairness, I reproduce in full.

IV

THE AUTHOR NEED A DISTRICT

In those beautiful days in May to be in tune with the customs and among my contemporaries do
negligible role, I need two things: a district and a straw hat.

Almost everyone has a district and a straw hat. Some have straw hat and lack of district. Others
have only the district but can be counted on the fingers of one hand
the Spanish they are today, while no district and no hat.

Reader: Did not you will loose around a district to offer me? Have you looked good? ...

All my friends have district, and even boasts some people two or three.

Judging from the appearances, in Spain there are many more districts candidates, and many more citizens
eligible that electors. Men who have spent the winter without a coat, now appear in the gathering
of coffee with great districts. No surprise me that some of them pawned his ...

It is very beautiful single man's freedom, but when one is becoming
a bit old and begins to suffer stomach, he misses a loving hand that
bun in bed and serve him cups of broth.

It is also very beautiful situation freelance writer; but not at
election time.

At election time, who does not feel the desire of a party political
party to give you a loving and district would give a stock the tender
wife?

To go out and get his hat, his stick and gloves, you have the feeling these days that you are
missing something still, and what it lacks is a district. Then, in the usual coterie, so all the
friends start talking about their respective districts, the man who lacks District is something
of a pariah.

The waiters serve them anyway. The boots do not go to your requirements ...

Life without district has come to seem as an unbearable burden. I suppose that people point me in the
street saying: - He's a man who does not have district. And so I am writing the reader asking
one. After all, a district is given to anyone. Make the reader a little effort. I need a district,
and the need for any need.

V

SPAIN, parliamentarism EMPORIO

What is meant by a very MP?

In Spain, for a very parliamentary enriende a man who has a lot parliament.

Mr. Dato, for example, and the Count of Romanones very parliamentarians
are men.

Also is quite parliamentary Mr. García Prieto.

And I, who at first glance seem Parliamentary anything, I am, however, considerably more than
most Spanish: Members I have many friends, I can have coffee in Congress,
I can use the franchise Parliamentary postal ...

When Mr. Maura dissolved
the Parliament, said it was because being a very parliamentary would
not approve the budget on the backs of national representation.

Representation was then datista national Romanones, albista, socialist, etc., and Mr. Maura needed
Maurista national representation in order not to govern the country back, but according with
him. I needed a Parliament, in short, to not tell him that he was a ruler unparliamentary.

And since I needed a Parliament, Mr. Maura - and who says Mr. Maura said Mr. Doe - the devoted
to it. First, the head of government elected candidates. Then, candidates voters chose. And
within days, Mr. Maura will own Parliament as well as some gentlemen have a home theater.

Who said that here govern arbitrarily, without taking into account the tastes and the Interests
of the country? Here is no such thing.

The country has shed its blood to achieve the parliamentary regime, and respectful of the
national will, to each government will give here their respective Parliament. In the same period of
time, no nation has had so many Parliaments and Spain. Spain is undoubtedly the most parliamentary
village in the world.

VI

NEW MINISTERS

When the present government falls, our expenditure budget will be burdened with a how many more
layoffs. For people to ask new ministers!

What is meant by a new minister?

For a new minister does not mean a young minister or a minister other
than the other ministers, but a man who is minister for the first
time.

A new minister is usually an old secretary, a governor general old
or older ... The Marquis de Mochales came to minister and died, but
this unfortunate event will be unique in our history.

Most politicians do not perceive their ambition to get filled ministers. Being a minister is not,
in fact, be nothing. A minister is at the mercy of power moderator, at the mercy of the press,
at the mercy of the parliamentary opposition, at the mercy of all the world. In contrast, a former
minister is not at the mercy of anyone. Portfolios and the layoffs go remain. And this, far from
dying after they have sworn in, is when the Most ministers are beginning to live.

Ministers "new? No. Never. A minister once again used and two or three months is converted from
a former minister. There are countries with a strong economic life that can afford the luxury
of frequent changes of ministers, as well as a rich man changes frequently
car, but we are not in the same case.

If every new layoff annulment of an Unemployment old! If when Mr. Prado Palace, for example, be
declared former minister cease to be former ministers or the Marquis de Lema Bugallal Count! ...
But today, what we should do is get along with former ministers today. They are very, very old,
so as the same old parliamentary system are bad and are old fashioned, but we pose any new spending.
Well preserved, these former ministers may take yet another another quarter century or half century,
which in Spanish politics do not think it represents great thing.

And when they die at all - beyond the year 1950 - then you may consider replacing with some young
men, and D. Melquiades Alvarez, for example, or Dr. Simard ...

VII

MINISTERIAL AN ARTICLE

If I were a ministerial writer, what item do about the last election!

We have been beaten in big cities - say - but this does not surprise us. Large cities are real sources
of corruption, which are lost entirely the feelings of humility, obedience and love of the past.
Almost all local citizens can read and write and although a strong censure gag the writers
of bad press, solvents ideas always find a way by which people reach the brain. Undoubtedly,
illiteracy worth a thousand times more than censorship. The whole art of radical writers crashes
field man, a man healthy in body and intelligence, who can neither read nor need it to work the land
of his lord and to give the vote to the candidate order. And voted
man of the field ministerial candidacy.

We have succeeded in the field, which still retain the venerable traditions
of our older, where the doctor, untainted by foreign theories, good
blood to their patients, As in the days of our grandparents, where
the poor are resigned to being poor as the blond resigned to being
blond, where the priest prohibits dance on seized and newspapers are
read liberal, and which respects the order, the property, the clergy
and the civil guard.

We have triumphed in the field and have failed in the cities.

Is there anything more significant?

Because cities are left in the hand of God. In Madrid, the youth spend their lives dancing foreign
dances, drinking beverages and foreign - a thousand times more heinous
thing - reading books foreign.

Now it has given the locals to put in the bath houses and lift, and this be very pleasant for
the body, but it must be fatal to the soul. Baths, libraries, large hotels, political rights,
a University, a People's House ... Do our best need any of these things?

Days ago, when Madrid balconies adorned with all sorts of hangings tribute Heart of Jesus, believed
that the capital of Spain did not repent and amend their errors.

The election showed us that this assumption was false. Undoubtedly, Madrid having hangings
are wanting a pretext for display, and whatever the pretext the exhibits, but this show, purely
decorative, never has an ideological character. Madrid is lost, and with him are lost every
major Spanish cities. They have been lost public libraries, the press, running water, cosmopolitan
hotel, the telegraph, telephone, theaters, in places of comfort, are becoming vehicles sinful
ideas, and many other inventions of this century cursed.

(For a writer ministerial all things are antiministeriales invention of this century.) How could they
vote for us?

Our defeat shows that we have nothing to do with this time of dissolution social. We represent the
venerable traditions of our elders. We are the past.

We are the year of Nanita ...

VIII

THE DECEPTION OF THE CRISIS

Whenever
a government falls, I experience a feeling of liberation.

The air seems pure, whereas women more beautiful, the food more palatable.

-
Has taken odd jobs - he exclaimed - but at last we are free.

We do not have government. We realized our ideal ...

Unfortunately, it is in our nature can not ever realize happiness present. Thus, happiness is unattainable,
and therefore, end up working out all ministerial crisis. After two or three days, the government
dropped is always replaced by another, and again you have to devote to the task of demolishing.
Totaling the various crises that little by little, we get, only if Spain will come to life
each year a whole month Government. A twelve months! Not worth it.

For my part, I will never help to bring down any government, as I do not guarantee then they
will not replace it with another. More when the other is sure that we had also had to knock it
down before. I do not see why a man may be worthwhile unmarried and self-employed professionals,
who will govern Dato or Mr. Maura, Mr. García Prieto and Mr. Sánchez de Toca. Probably much more
interested these the Governors to me I can never interested me that
I govern them.

And if a people can not live without a government - a premise that does not grant any value
while, as now, can not live with him - and if people can not live without government and whether
governments are "a necessary evil," then at least we must demand that the crisis will last
a little longer. A crisis of three or four days is not worth the effort required Blue bench
to start these ministers who seem limpets.

IX

POLITICAL ACTION FOR SEAFOOD

It initiates a change in Spanish politics. Until recent days, politicians used to be, between
us, a man in the province of Pontevedra, a personal friend of the Marquis de Riestra and father
of a numerous family. When a countryman of mine had no job and could not do anything enabling
it to live on their land, if he had enough money to go to Buenos Aires, came to Madrid and spent a
minister. For myself, I say, this summer, sailors me in my town called none other than a school
group, those simple people knew I lived in Madrid and I could not
imagine living in anything other than a minister, which, after all,
showed a certain logic.

If, indeed, most of my fellow residents in Madrid were not ministers
or former ministers, how would arrange to pay the landlord?

Is it that Mr. García Prieto, for example, the court would hold writing
articles for El Sol?

But now, to get a minister, and not enough being born in the province Pontevedra, and starts to
become indispensable to be Catalan. And this is the change initiated in Spanish politics.

At first glance, it seems that this is a superficial change, and perhaps it is not, in fact,
a very profound change. However, I think that between the politician and the political Galician Catalan
is a difference more important than the accent. What terrible politician Galician was his uncanny
ability to reproduce. Born at the foot of the Rias Baixas, those reproduced politicians like sardines.
After fifteen years, each minister had given life to five ministers, ten deputies, ten and
twenty CEOs governors, excluding subordinate employees. Everyone knows the fecundity of Pontevedra
province, which is one of the most populous, if not the most populated of Spain. This fertility often
attributed to seafood, and if the explanation is accurate, seafood
come to be, in the end, the real culprits of nepotism Spanish.

Nepotism Spanish or oysters, crabs and barnacles of the Rias Baixas! ...

Catalan politicians do not seem to play as much as politicians Galicia, and this is, by itself,
a great advantage for the country. Do not eat, perhaps, many seafood in Catalonia, or is the
Mediterranean seafood worth less than the Atlantic? On the other hand, is known to us all the political
possibilities of Catalan seafood? If there someone in Spain to study politics with a truly scientific
approach, I propose this problem, which I consider a major interest, but unfortunately, theres
no really serious political treatise.

X

TAKE OVER

"When insubordination manifested in Barcelona or in another province - said the general Aznar - only
proceed energetically dominates and makes it into law. "" If necessary
- he said - it devastates the population ... "

I believe these words
of General Aznar have any more of a project, and I strange to see
that some newspapers reject it without taking the trouble to study
it technically. Because of course if any difficulty exists in Spain
to raze villages, to me seems to be a purely technical difficulty.
That's imagine that the Government can not Barcelona sweep on grounds
of moral, political or legal shows, in my opinion, a profound ignorance
about razing. The difficulties of this triple character have little
importance in the country of La Cierva y Sánchez Guerra. Instead,
the difficulties techniques are, in the land of the same gentlemen,
some really serious.

And sitting on this, I think we should leave
aside considerations idle, and beg General Aznar not to develop its
plan. When General Aznar, who has in the Army a place so high, has
hinted at the idea of ​​razing Barcelona to dominate the elements
rebels, is, undoubtedly, this idea is feasible. However, general:
we need a budget. We want to know how long and how much money it would
compromise his honor to do in Barcelona a sweeping way. The German
Army, a formidable material and direction of the first order, took
four years to raze to the satisfaction of Kaiser Reims; and Reims
to be one of the richest cities of France, invested in destroying
as much as what she was worth. Of course we are not as demanding as
the former Kaiser. Used countless resignations, we'll probably settle
for a much more devastation wider than that of the city of Reims,
but what that would cost us arrasamientito? The case is that, to avoid
the remote possibility of losing Barcelona once, let's not really
to lose twice, first leveled, and second, investing money in the razing
which cost the building. On the other hand, Barcelona is an urgent
problem, and if the leveling may take fifty or sixty years, I do not
think that constitutes an effective solution.

The ecclesiastical councillor--who had become acquainted with his own nature by long experience
in preaching funeral sermons, and sermons on the New Year, and knew full well that he was himself
always the first person and frequently the last, to be affected by the pathos of his own eloquence--now
rose with dignified solemnity, on seeing himself and the others hanging so long by the dry
rope, and addressed the chamber:--No man, he said, who had read his printed works, could fail
to know that he carried a heart about him as well as other people; and a heart, he would add,
that had occasion to repress such holy testimonies of its tenderness as tears, lest he should
thereby draw too heavily on the sympathies and the purses of his fellow-men, rather than elaborately
to provoke them by stimulants for any secondary views, or to serve an indirect purpose of his
own: 'This heart,' said he, 'has already shed tears (but they were already shed secretly),
for Kabel was my friend;' and, so saying, he paused for a moment and looked about him.

With pleasure he observed that all were sitting as dry as corks: indeed, at this particular
moment, when he himself, by interrupting their several water-works, had made them furiously
angry, it might as well have been expected that crocodiles, fallow-deer, elephants, witches,
or ravens should weep for Van der Kabel, as his presumptive heirs. Among them all, Flacks was
the only one who continued to make way: he kept steadily before his mind the following little
extempore assortment of objects:--Van der Kabel's good and beneficent acts; the old petticoats
so worn and tattered, and the gray hair of his female congregation at morning service; Lazarus
with his dogs; his own long coffin; innumerable decapitations; the Sorrows of Werther; a miniature
field of battle; and finally, himself and his own melancholy condition at this moment, itself
enough to melt any heart, condemned as he was in the bloom of youth by the second clause of
Van der Kabel's will to tribulation, and tears, and struggles:--Well done, Flacks! Three strokes
more with the pump-handle, and the water is pumped up and the house along with it.

Meantime Glantz, the ecclesiastical councillor, proceeded in his pathetic harangue--'Oh, Kabel,
my Kabel!' he ejaculated, and almost wept with joy at the near approach of his tears, 'the
time shall come that by the side of thy loving breast, covered with earth, mine also shall
lie mouldering and in cor----' ruption he would have said; but Flacks, starting up in trouble,
and with eyes overflowing, threw a hasty glance around him, and said, 'With submission, gentlemen,
to the best of my belief I am weeping.' Then sitting down, with great satisfaction he allowed
the tears to stream down his face; that done, he soon recovered his cheerfulness and his aridity.
Glantz the councillor thus saw the prize fished away before his eyes--those very eyes which
he had already brought into an Accessit,[19] or inchoate state of humidity; this vexed him:
and his mortification was the greater on thinking of his own pathetic exertions, and the abortive
appetite for the prize which he had thus uttered in words as ineffectual as his own sermons;
and at this moment he was ready to weep for spite--and 'to weep the more because he wept in
vain.' As to Flacks, a protocol was immediately drawn up of his watery compliance with the
will of Van der Kabel: and the messuage in Dog-street was knocked down to him for ever. The
Mayor adjudged it to the poor devil with all his heart: indeed, this was the first occasion
ever known in Haslau, on which the tears of a schoolmaster and a curate had converted themselves--not
into mere amber that incloses only a worthless insect, like the tears of Heliodes, but like
those of the goddess Freia, into heavy gold. Glantz congratulated Flacks very warmly; and observed
with a smiling air, that possibly he had himself lent him a helping hand by his pathetic address.
As to the others, the separation between them and Flacks was too palpable, in the mortifying
distinction of wet and dry, to allow of any cordiality between them; and they stood aloof therefore:
but they stayed to hear the rest of the will, which they now awaited in a state of anxious
agitation.

[19] To the English reader it may be necessary to explain, that in the continental universities,
etc., when a succession of prizes is offered, graduated according to the degrees of merit,
the illiptical formula of 'Accessit' denotes the second prize; and hence, where only a single
prize is offered, the second degree of merit may properly be expressed by the term here used.

[20] From a MS. poem of a great living Poet. [Written in January 1838. The lines occur in Wordsworth's
Prelude, Book Tenth, line 410.

MR. SCHNACKENBERGER;

OR,

TWO MASTERS FOR ONE DOG.

FROM THE GERMAN.

CHAPTER I.

IN WHAT MANNER MR. SCHNACKENBERGER MADE HIS ENTRY INTO B----.

The sun had just set, and all the invalids at the baths of B---- had retired to their lodgings,
when the harsh tones of welcome from the steeple announced the arrival of a new guest. Forthwith
all the windows were garrisoned with young faces and old faces, pretty faces and ugly faces;
and scarce one but was overspread with instantaneous merriment--a feu-de-joie of laughter,
that travelled up the street in company with the very extraordinary object that now advanced
from the city gates. Upon a little, meagre, scare-crow of a horse, sate a tall, broad-shouldered
young fellow, in a great-coat of bright pea-green, whose variegated lights and shades, from
soaking rains and partial dryings, bore sullen testimony to the changeable state of the weather
for the last week. Out of this great-coat shot up, to a monstrous height, a head surmounted
by a huge cocked hat, one end of which hung over the stem, the other over the stern of the
horse: the legs belonging to this head were sheathed in a pair of monstrous boots, technically
called 'field-pieces,' which, descending rather too low, were well plaistered with flesh-coloured
mud. More, perhaps, in compliance with the established rule, than for any visible use, a switch
was in the rider's hand; for to attribute to such a horse, under such a load, any power to
have quitted a pace that must have satisfied the most rigorous police in Poland, was obviously
too romantic. Depending from his side, and almost touching the ground, rattled an enormous
back-sword, which suggested to the thinking mind a salutary hint to allow free passage, without
let or unseasonable jesting, to Mr. Jeremiah Schnackenberger, student at the University of
X----. He, that might be disposed to overlook this hint, would certainly pay attention to a
second, which crept close behind the other in the shape of a monstrous dog, somewhat bigger
than the horse, and presenting on every side a double tier of most respectable teeth. Observing
the general muster of the natives, which his appearance had called to the windows, the rider
had unslung and mounted a pipe, under whose moving canopy of clouds and vapours he might advance
in greater tranquillity: and during this operation, his very thoughtful and serious horse had
struck up a by-street--and made a dead stop, before his rider was aware, at the sign of the
Golden Sow.

Although the gold had long since vanished from the stone beast, and, to say the truth, every
part of the house seemed to sympathise admirably with the unclean habits of its patron image,
nevertheless, Mr. Jeremiah thought proper to comply with the instincts of his horse; and, as
nobody in the street, or in the yard, came forward to answer his call, he gave himself no further
trouble, but rode on through the open door right forwards into the bar.

CHAPTER II.

HOW MR. JEREMIAH CAME TO TAKE UP HIS QUARTERS AT THE GOLDEN SOW.

'The Lord, and his angels, protect us!--As I live, here comes the late governor!' ejaculated
the hostess, Mrs. Bridget Sweetbread; suddenly startled out of her afternoon's nap by the horse's
hoofs--and seeing right before her what she took for the apparition of Don Juan; whom, as it
afterwards appeared, she had seen in a pantomime the night before.

'Thunder and lightning! my good woman,' said the student laughing, 'would you dispute the reality
of my flesh and blood?'

Mrs. Bridget, however, on perceiving her mistake, cared neither for the sword nor for the dog,
but exclaimed, 'Why then, let me tell you, Sir, it's not the custom in this country to ride
into parlours, and disturb honest folks when they're taking their rest. Innkeeping's not the
trade it has been to me, God he knows: but, for all that, I'll not put up with such work from
nobody.'

'Good, my dear creature; what you say is good--very good: but let me tell you, it's not good
that I must be kept waiting in the street, and no soul in attendance to take my horse and feed
him.'

'Oh, that base villain of a hostler!' said the landlady, immediately begging pardon, and taking
hold of the bridle, whilst Mr. Schnackenberger dismounted.

'That's a good creature,' said he; 'I love you for this: and I don't care if I take up my quarters
here, which at first was not my intention. Have you room for me?'

'Room!' answered Mrs. Sweetbread; 'ah! now there's just the whole Golden Sow at your service;
the more's the pity.'

On Mr. Jeremiah's asking the reason for this superfluity of room, she poured out a torrent
of abuse against the landlord of The Double-barrelled Gun, who--not content with having at
all times done justice to his sign--had latterly succeeded, with the help of vicious coachmen
and unprincipled postilions, in drawing away her whole business, and had at length utterly
ruined the once famous inn of The Golden Sow. And true it was that the apartment, into which
she now introduced her guest, showed some vestiges of ancient splendour, in the pictures of
six gigantic sows. The late landlord had been a butcher, and had christened his inn from his
practice of slaughtering a pig every week; and the six swine, as large as life, and each bearing
a separate name, were designed to record his eminent skill in the art of fattening.

His widow, who was still in mourning for him, must certainly have understood Mr. Schnackenberger's
words, 'I love you for this,' in a sense very little intended by the student. For she brought
up supper herself; and, with her own hand, unarmed with spoon or other implement, dived after
and secured a little insect which was floundering about in the soup. So much the greater was
her surprise on observing, that, after such flattering proofs of attention, her guest left
the soup untouched; and made no particular application to the other dishes--so well harmonising
with the general character of the Golden Sow. At last, however, she explained his want of appetite
into the excess of his passion for herself; and, on that consideration, failed not to lay before
him a statement of her flourishing circumstances, and placed in a proper light the benefits
of a marriage with a woman somewhat older than himself.

Mr. Schnackenberger, whose good-nature was infinite, occasionally interrupted his own conversation
with Juno, the great dog, who meantime was dispatching the supper without any of her master's
scruples, to throw in a 'Yes,' or a 'No,'--a, 'Well,' or a 'So, so.' But at length his patience
gave way, and he started up--saying, 'Well: Sufficit: Now--march, old witch!' This harmless
expression she took in such ill part, that, for mere peace' sake, he was obliged to lead her
to the door and shut her out: and then, undressing himself, he stepped into bed; and, in defiance
of the straw which everywhere stuck out, and a quilt of a hundred-weight,[21] he sunk into
a deep slumber under the agreeable serenade of those clamorous outcries which Mrs. Sweetbread
still kept up on the outside of the door.

[21] The custom in North Germany is to sleep under a bed as well as upon one; consequently,
when this happens to be a cheap one, it cannot be stuffed with feathers, down, &c., but with
some heavier material.

CHAPTER III.

IN WHICH OUR HERO POLISHES A ROUGH-RIDER.

'Fire and furies!' exclaimed Mr. Schnackenberger, as Juno broke out into uproarious barking
about midnight: the door was opened from the outside; and in stepped the landlady, arrayed
in a night-dress that improved her charms into a rivalry with those of her sign at the street-door;
accompanied by a fellow, who, by way of salutation, cracked an immense hunting-whip.

'So it's here that I'm to get my own again?' cried the fellow: and forthwith Mr. Jeremiah stepped
out of bed, and hauled him up to the light of the lamp which the landlady carried.

'Yes, Sir,' said, the rough-rider, 'it's I, sure enough;' and, to judge by the countenance
of his female conductor, every accent of his anger was music of the spheres to her unquenchable
wrath: 'I'm the man, sure enough, whose horse you rode away with; and that you'll find to be
a true bill.'

'Rode away with!' cried Mr. Jeremiah: 'Now, may the sweetest of all thunderbolts----But, rascal,
this instant what's to pay? then take thy carrion out of the stable, and be off.' So saying,
Mr. Schnackenberger strode to the bed for his well-filled purse.

On these signs of solvency, however, the horse-dealer turned up the gentle phasis of his character,
and said, 'Nay, nay; since things are so, why it's all right; and, in the Lord's name, keep
the horse as long as you want him.'

'Dog! in the first place, and firstly, tell me what's your demand? in the second place, and
secondly, go to the d----l.'

But whilst the rough-rider continued with low bows to decline the first offer, being satisfied,
as it seemed, with the second, the choleric Mr. Schnackenberger cried out, 'Seize him, Juno!'
And straightway Juno leaped upon him, and executed the arrest so punctually--that the trembling
equestrian, without further regard to ceremony, made out his charge.

Forthwith Mr. Jeremiah paid down the demand upon the table, throwing in something extra, with
the words, 'That for the fright.' The dealer in horse-flesh returned him a thousand thanks;
hoped for his honour's further patronage; and then, upon being civilly assured by Mr. Jeremiah,
that if he did not in one instant walk down the stairs, he would, to his certain knowledge,
have to fly down them; the rough-rider, in company with the landlady, took a rapid and polite
leave of Mr. Schnackenberger; who was too much irritated by the affront to compose himself
again to sleep.

CHAPTER IV.

HOW MR. SCHNACKENBERGER AND JUNO CONDUCT THEMSELVES WHEN THE HOUSE BECOMES TOO HOT TO HOLD THEM.

Day was beginning to dawn, when a smoke, which forced its way through the door, and which grew
every instant thicker and more oppressive, a second time summoned Mr. Schnackenberger from
his bed. As he threw open the door, such a volume of flames rolled in from the staircase--which
was already on fire from top to bottom--that he saw there was no time to be lost: so he took
his pipe, loaded it as quickly as possible, lighted it from the flames of the staircase, began
smoking, and then, drawing on his pea-green coat and buckling on his sword, he put his head
out of the window to see if there were any means of escape. To leap right down upon the pavement
seemed too hazardous; and the most judicious course, it struck him, would be to let himself
down upon the Golden Sow, which was at no great depth below his window, and from this station
to give the alarm. Even this, however, could not be reached without a leap: Mr. Schnackenberger
attempted it; and, by means of his great talents for equilibristic exercises, he hit the mark
so well, that he planted himself in the very saddle, as it were, upon the back of this respectable
brute. Unluckily, however, there was no house opposite; and Mrs. Sweetbread with her people
slept at the back. Hence it was, that for a very considerable space of time he was obliged
to continue riding the sign of the Golden Sow; whilst Juno, for whom he could not possibly
make room behind him, looked out of the window, and accompanied her master's text of occasional
clamours for assistance, with a very appropriate commentary of howls.

Some Poles at length passed by: but, not understanding one word of German--and seeing a man
thus betimes in the morning mounted on the golden sow, smoking very leisurely, and occasionally
hallooing, as if for his private amusement, they naturally took Mr. Schnackenberger for a maniac:
until, at length, the universal language of fire, which now began to burst out of the window,
threw some light upon the darkness of their Polish understandings. Immediately they ran for
assistance, which about the same moment the alarm-bells began to summon.

However, the fire-engines arrived on the ground before the ladders: these last were the particular
objects of Mr. Jeremiah's wishes: meantime, in default of those, and as the second best thing
that could happen, the engines played with such a well-directed stream of water upon the window--upon
the Golden Sow--and upon Mr. Jeremiah Schnackenberger, that for one while they were severally
rendered tolerably fire-proof. When at length the ladders arrived, and the people were on the
point of applying them to the Golden Sow, he earnestly begged that they would, first of all,
attend to a case of more urgent necessity: for himself, he was well mounted--as they saw; could
assure them that he was by no means in a combustible state; and, if they would be so good as
to be a little more parsimonious with their water, he didn't care if he continued to pursue
his morning's ride a little longer. On the other hand, Juno at the window to the right was
reduced every moment to greater extremities, as was pretty plainly indicated by the increasing
violence of her howling.

But the people took it ill that they should be desired to rescue a four-legged animal; and
peremptorily refused.

'My good lads,' said the man upon the sow, 'for heaven's sake don't delay any longer: one heaven,
as Pfeffel observes, is over all good creatures that are pilgrims on this earth--let their
travelling coat (which by the way is none of their own choosing) be what it may;--smooth like
yours and mine, or shaggy like Juno's.'

But all to no purpose: not Pfeffel himself in propriâ personâ could have converted them from
the belief that to take any trouble about such a brute was derogatory to the honour of the
very respectable citizens of B----. Recovered somewhat to our economist, was with his friend and others
employees to the superintendent's room (the mayor was in San Sebastian), and there he saw others
in the house, all consternadísimos. "The thing is serious ... What a disgrace! ... The Spanish
Navy! ... But how? Already seen, as ships had ... If looks count ... And the government, what will?
... Send an army immediately ... But Slovakia, if it is a torrent ... Cadiz revolt, revolt Seville,
Andalusia fire ... Poor Lady ... Well they told him, and ignoring it ... And the generals who were
in the Canaries? ... For in Cadiz. Prim What? Sailing to Barcelona ... In short, the last straw.
"

This was on 19. Bringas went home more dead than alive. All day and the following was as parallel,
not eating, not sleeping, not to ask for more news, embracing almost crying that brought the friendly,
fire shrift to the related conditions. The poor man, oblivious of all, they forgot how to managing
your home. If those days saw his wife Empress of Golconda, looks
and runs so cool.

With the loss of appetite trastornose nature. Frankly, there was reason to fear it a serious disturbance.
He walked with difficulty pronouncing some words clumsily, and the organ of vision had returned to
its old tricks, changing and coloring in a strange objects. Too bad, so damaged when they
were doing so well in the hearing that determined completing the
work of hair, which was very close!

"No, no - used to say - if this great shame prevails, I die. "

Rosalie and Paquito de Asis were also very downcast, although the former had moments where curiosity
was stronger than grief.

The revolution was a bad thing, as everyone said, but it was also
unknown, and unknown attracts the exalted imagination, and appeals
to those who have created a situation in your life irregular.

Come another time, another way of being, something new, great and to give game. "Well - she
thought - we will see that."

Fish continued to go to the house, but she had taken such a dislike, that barely addressed word.
In this regard, the thoughts of the proud lady were so many and so various, Succeed not to play.
Purpose was not to return to fish so little vermin substance, and he figured to be tending their
nets wide and beaten seas, through whose waters gallant cross sharks, whales and pompous pejes
of true stem. Your dreaming mind took her to the days of the coming winter, in which social
thought opening a campaign both entertaining and fruitful.

Dodging the treatment of fish, Telleria and little people or less,
seek stronger and more effective support in the Fúcares, the Trujillo,
and Cimarra other aristocratic families positive.

XLIX

It was the finishing of the world ... D. Francisco heard, moaning,
also pronounced Bejar Santoña, Santander and other places.

Mr. Fish, with unprecedented cruelty, told his friend who did not think that such a collapse
could be made up, because the kingdom was lost and had no choice but to get into France ...
Well he had said, it was announced it had forecast and predicted what was going on!

Candida, however, brought good news ... "Comes with an army Novaliches
atrocious but very awful ... You see how that disrupts in Jesus ...
They say that in some Andalusian towns the rebels have rejected ...
Here are many people who want to alarm, and paints things too vivid
colors.

I've heard it's not as much as it says. "

Bringas gave him a hug.

"And where is the Prim called?" - He asked.

- I heard that he had been shot ... And if not, I will later ... I contend that if Queen had the
courage to cum here and perform, and take a speech, saying you are
all my children it would fix this easily.

The same thought Bringas,
but he would have preferred to resuscitate Narváez, something a bit
difficult. "Oh, if D. Ramon lived ... Well, as this is not resolved
soon, we will have in Madrid a slaughter, at for as little troops
here is the so-called democrats and demagogues will lie the street. Nobody would know
me there; and I might at any rate keep Juno a fortnight longer! And exactly in this way it
had happened that Mr. Schnackenberger had come to B----.

At this instant, he was indebted to a lucky accident for a momentary diversion of his thoughts
from the danger which threatened him in regard to Juno. Amongst other visitors to the baths,
who were passing by at this early hour, happened to be the Princess of * *. Her carriage drew
up at the very moment when Mr. Jeremiah, having dismounted from the sow, was descending the
ladder: with her usual gracious manner, she congratulated the student upon his happy deliverance;
and, finding that he was a countryman of her own, she invited him to a ball which she gave
on the evening of that day, in honour of the King's birthday.

Now it must be acknowledged that a ball-room was not exactly the stage on which Mr. Schnackenberger's
habits of life had qualified him for shining: however, the pleasure of a nearer acquaintance
with the interesting princess--held out too flattering a prospect to allow of his declining
her invitation. Just at this moment Juno returned.

Meantime the fire (occasioned probably by a spark falling from the landlady's lamp amongst
the straw under the staircase) had been extinguished: and Mrs. Sweetbread, who had at length
been roused at the back, now made her appearance; and with many expressions of regret for what
had happened to Mr. Schnackenberger, who had entirely re-established himself in her esteem
by his gold-laden purse, and also by what she called his 'very handsome behaviour' to the horse-dealer,
she requested that he would be pleased to step into one of her back rooms; at the same time,
offering to reinstate his clothes in wearable condition by drying them as rapidly as possible:
a necessity which was too clamorously urgent for immediate attention--to allow of the dripping
student's rejecting her offer.

CHAPTER VI.

IN WHAT MANNER MR. JEREMIAH PREPARED HIMSELF FOR THE BALL.

As Mr. Jeremiah stood looking out of the window for the purpose of whiling away a tedious forenoon,
it first struck his mind--upon the sight of a number of men dressed very differently from himself--that
his wardrobe would scarcely match with the festal splendour of the fête at which he was to
be present in the evening. Even if it had been possible to overlook the tarnished lustre of
his coat, not much embellished by its late watery trials upon the golden sow, yet he could
not possibly make his appearance in a surtout. He sent therefore to one tailor after another:
but all assured him that they had their hands much too full of business to undertake the conversion
of his surtout into a dress coat against the evening; still less could they undertake to make
a new one. Just as vainly did he look about for shoes: many were on sale; but none of them
with premises spacious enough to accommodate his very respectable feet.

All this put him into no little perplexity. True it was, that Mrs. Sweetbread had spontaneously
thrown open to his inspection the wardrobe of her deceased husband. But even he had contrived
to go through this world in shoes of considerably smaller dimensions than Mr. Jeremiah demanded.
And from a pretty large choice of coats there was not one which he could turn to account. For,
to say nothing of their being one and all too short by a good half ell, even in the very best
of them he looked precisely as that man looks who has lately slaughtered a hog, or as that
man looks who designs to slaughter a hog.

Now, then, when all his plans for meeting the exigencies of his case had turned out abortive,
suddenly a bold idea struck him. In a sort of inspiration he seized a pair of scissors, for
the purpose of converting with his own untutored hand of genius his pea-green surtout into
a pea-green frock. This operation having, in his own judgment, succeeded to a marvel, he no
longer hesitated to cut out a pair of ball shoes from his neat's-leather 'field-pieces.' Whatever
equipments were still wanting could be had for money, with the exception of a shirt; and, as
to that, the wedding shirt of the late Mr. Sweetbread would answer the purpose very passably.

What provoked our hero most of all were the new patent shoe-buckles, the fine points of which
would not take firm hold of the coarse leather shoes, but on every bold step burst asunder--so
that he was obliged to keep his eye warily upon them, and in consideration of their tender
condition, to set his feet down to the ground very gently.

The hostess had just sunk pretty deep into her customary failing of intoxication, when he went
to her and asked how he looked in his gala dress.

'Look!' said she; 'why, like a king baked in gingerbread. That
is what God wants. Resignation. The mobs will soon invade this house to loot ... Not sparing anyone. Let
us be worthy accept martyrdom ...».

He was going through something in my throat ... Silent all, taking the noise in city ​​halls and
the courtyard sounded. Great anxiety reigned throughout the house. Neighbors went to the door to
get news and communicate their views. Down some, eager whether developments occurred, but
in the courtyard was very quiet, and although the doors remained open, no living creature came.
When least expected, came Candida turbadísima, saying the drowning
cries:

"Ya ... and ...».

- What, madam, what is?

- Looting ...
Oh D. Francisco of my soul ... By Lepanto Street seen lower mobs.

But what facade, which faces harrowing what uncombed beards, what
filthy hands!

... Nothing, now behead us.

- But the palace guard ... The Beefeaters
...

- If you must walk rebels also ... They are all about.

The Lord help us!

There was a moment of panic in the house, but was not of long duration,
because Bringas, leaving the hallway, they saw that there ran some
residents of the city, as sedate as if nothing happened.

"But what?".

- Nothing: a few kids who are stirring in the portal, but no care.

Of City Council have sent a guard.

Paquito of Assisi fell, against the advice of his father, who feared any unexpected disaster, half
hour and counting up what happened.

"Below is a guard of civilians."

- With guns?

- Yes, that caught
this afternoon in the Park ... But peaceful people.

Some wear hats, other hat, the hat and that beret. It seems they are a joke.

- Yes, for the little jokes we are ... And the troops?

- Had been
withdrawn to barracks.

- So, Santo Cristo del Perdon!, We are in
the hands of the mob, the shirtless, so-called mass ...

- They put
a sign reading: Palace of the Nation, guarded by the Village.

- Yes,
good ...-- account will Bringas said keenest pain -.

It will not be at the Palace or a lint.

Luck is that before coming here have a lot to be primed, and when boarding these neighborhoods,
are already so sick that ...

Continued overnight unrest.

Bringas and many neighbors stayed up or did bring supplies for several
days.

At every moment feared being undertaken by mobs. But to my great surprise found that no sound
disturbed the peace of the Alcazar August. It seemed that the monarchy was still sleeping on it,
quiet and calm, like the good times.

On the morning of 30, Candida went very suffocated. "Do not know what's going on?" - Said before
greeting.

"What, madam, what?" - Asked everyone with the greatest anxiety, believing
that something very great had occurred.

- Well, those poor people
that guards at the Palace has not eaten all night.



'Ah! my darling!' said he, laughing, 'just mind Juno: have an eye to Juno, my darling;' and
for Juno's sake he suppressed the 'old witch,' that his lips were itching a second time to
be delivered of.

CHAPTER VII.

MR. SCHNACKENBERGER IS ENAMOURED, AND OF WHOM; AND WHAT PROSPECTS OPEN UPON HIM IN HIS PURSUIT
OF 'LA BELLE PASSION.'

At the hotel of the princess, all the resources of good taste and hospitality were called forth
to give éclat to the fête, and do honour to the day; and by ten o'clock, a very numerous and
brilliant company had already assembled.

So much the more astounding must have been the entry of Mr. Jeremiah Schnackenberger; who,
by the way, was already familiar to the eyes of many, from his very public entrance into the
city on the preceding evening, and to others from his morning's exhibition on the golden sow.
His eyes and his thoughts being occupied by the single image of the fascinating hostess, of
course it no more occurred to him to remark that his self-constructed coat was detaching itself
at every step from its linings, whilst the pockets of the ci-devant surtout still displayed
their original enormity of outline--than in general it would ever have occurred to him that
the tout ensemble of his costume was likely to make, and had, in fact, made a very great sensation.

This very general attention to Mr. Schnackenberger, and the total unconsciousness of this honour
on the part of Mr. Schnackenberger himself, did not escape the notice of the princess; and,
at the first opportunity, she dispatched a gentleman to draw his attention to the indecorum
of his dress--and to put him in the way of making the proper alterations. Laughter and vexation
struggled in Mr. Schnackenberger's mind, when he became aware of the condition of his equipments:
and he very gladly accompanied the ambassador of his hostess into a private room, where clothes
and shoes were furnished him, in which he looked like any other reasonable man. On his return
to the ball-room, he lost no time in making his acknowledgments to the princess, and explaining
the cause of his unbecoming attire. The princess, with a natural goodness of heart and true
hospitality, was anxious to do what she could to restore her strange guest to satisfaction
with himself, and to establish him in some credit with the company: she had besides discovered
with pleasure that amidst all his absurdities, Mr. Schnackenberger was really a man of some
ability: on these several considerations, therefore, she exerted herself to maintain a pretty
long conversation with him; which honour Mr. Jeremiah so far misinterpreted, as to ascribe
it to an interest of a very tender character. To Mr. Schnackenberger, who had taken up the
very extraordinary conceit that his large person had some attractions about it, there could
naturally be nothing very surprising in all this: and he felt himself called upon not to be
wanting to himself, but to push his good fortune. Accordingly, he kept constantly about the
person of the princess: let her move in what direction she would, there was Mr. Jeremiah Schnackenberger
at hand ready to bewitch her with his conversation; and, having discovered that she was an
amateur of botany, and purposed visiting a botanical garden on the following day, he besieged
her with offers of his services in the capacity of guide.

'Possibly, when the time comes,' said the princess, aloud, 'I shall avail myself of your goodness;'
and the visible displeasure, with which she withdrew herself from his worrying importunities,
so obviously disposed all the bystanders to smile--that Mr. Schnackenberger himself became
alive to his own bétise, and a blush of shame and vexation suffused his countenance. What served
at the moment greatly to exasperate these feelings, was the behaviour of a certain Mr. Von
Pilsen--who had from the first paid uncommon attention to the very extraordinary phenomenon
presented by Mr. Schnackenberger's person--had watched the whole course of the persecutions
with which he had distressed the princess--and at this moment seemed quite unable to set any
bounds to his laughter. In extreme dudgeon, Mr. Schnackenberger hastened into one of the most
remote apartments, and flung himself back upon a sofa. Covering his, eyes with his hands, he
saw none of the numbers who passed by him. But the first time that he looked up, behold! a
paper was lying upon his breast. He examined it attentively; and found the following, words
written in pencil, to all appearance by a female hand: 'We are too narrowly watched in this
place. To-morrow morning about nine o'clock! The beautiful botanic gardens will secure us a
fortunate rendezvous.'

'Aye,' said Mr. Jeremiah, 'sure enough it's from her!' He read the note again and again: and
the more unhappy he had just now been, so much the more was he now intoxicated with his dawning
felicities.

CHAPTER VIII.

IN WHICH JUNO PLAYS A PRINCIPAL PART.

The rattling of a chain through crashing glass and porcelain, which spread alarm through the
ball-room, would hardly have drawn Mr. Schnackenberger's attention in his present condition
of rapturous elevation, had not the well-known voice of Juno reached his ears at the same moment.
He hurried after the sound--shocked, and to be shocked. The fact was simply this: Juno had
very early in the evening withdrawn herself from the surveillance of the Golden Sow, and had
followed her master's steps. Often ejected from the mansion of the princess, she had as often
returned; so that at last it was thought best to chain her up in the garden. Unfortunately,
a kitten belonging to a young female attendant of the princess had suddenly run past; Juno
made a rush after it; the chain broke away from the woodwork of the kennel; the panic-struck
kitten retreated into the house--taking the first road which presented: close upon the rear
of the kitten pressed Juno and her chain; close upon the rear of Juno pressed the young woman
in anguish for her kitten's life, and armed with a fly-flapper; and, the road happening to
lead into the ball-room, the whole train--pursuers and pursued--helter-skelter fell into the
quarters of the waltzers. The kitten attempted to take up a position behind a plateau on one
of the side-boards: but from this she was immediately dislodged by Juno; and the retreat commencing
afresh right across the side-boards which were loaded with refreshments, all went to wreck--glasses
and china, all was afloat--sherbet and lemonade, raspberry-vinegar and orgeat: and at the very
moment when Mr. Jeremiah returned, the belligerent powers dripping with celestial nectar--having
just charged up a column of dancers--were wheeling through the door by which he had entered:
and the first check to the wrath of Juno was the seasonable arrest of her master's voice.

That the displeasure of the dancers, who had been discomposed and besprinkled by Juno, fell
entirely upon her master, was pretty evident from their faces. Of all the parties concerned,
however, none was more irritated than the young woman; she was standing upon the stairs, caressing
and fondling her kitten, as Mr. Schnackenberger went down, leading Juno in his pocket-handkerchief;
and she let drop some such very audible hints upon the ill-breeding and boorishness of certain
pretended gentlemen, that Mr. Schnackenberger would, without doubt, have given her a very severe
reprimand--if he had not thought it more dignified to affect to overlook her.

CHAPTER IX.

WHICH TREATS OF EXPERIMENTS NOT VERY COMMON AT BIRTHDAY FÊTES.

'Now, my dears,' said Mr. Von Pilsen to a party who were helping him to laugh at the departed
Mr. Schnackenberger, 'as soon as the fellow returns, we must get him into our party at supper.'

'Returns?' exclaimed another; 'why I should fancy he had had enough of birthday fêtes for one
life.'

'You think so?' said Von Pilsen: 'so do not I. No, no, my good creature; I flatter myself that
I go upon pretty sure grounds: I saw those eyes which he turned upon the princess on making
his exit: and mind what I say, he takes his beast home, and----comes back again. Therefore,
be sure, and get him amongst us at supper, and set the barrel abroach. I wouldn't for all the
world the monster should go away untapped.'

The words were scarce uttered, when, sure enough, the body, or 'barrel,' of Mr. Schnackenberger
did roll into the room for a second time. Forthwith Von Pilsen and his party made up to him;
and Pilsen having first with much art laboured to efface any suspicions which might have possessed
the student's mind in consequence of his former laughter, proceeded to thank him for the very
extraordinary sport which his dog had furnished; and protested that he must be better acquainted
with him.

'Why, as to that,' said Mr. Schnackenberger, 'a better acquaintance must naturally be very
agreeable to me. But, in respect to the dog, and what you call the sport, I'm quite of another
opinion; and would give all I'm worth that it had not happened.'

'Oh! no,' they all declared; 'the fête would have wanted its most brilliant features if Mr.
Schnackenberger or his dog had been absent. No, no: without flattery he must allow them to
call him the richest fund of amusement--the brightest attraction of the evening.' But Schnackenberger
shook his head incredulously; said he wished he could think so: but with a deep sigh he persisted
in his own opinion; in which he was the more confirmed, when he perceived that the princess,
who was now passing him to the supper-room, turned away her eyes the moment she perceived him.

In this state of mind Mr. Jeremiah naturally, but unconsciously, lent himself to the designs
of his new acquaintances. Every glass that the devil of mischief and of merry malice poured
out, did the devil of Schnackenberger's despair drink off; until at last the latter devil was
tolerably well drowned in wine.

About this time enter Juno again--being her second (and positively last) appearance upon these
boards. Mr. Jeremiah's new friends paid so much homage to the promising appearance of her jaws,
that they made room for her very respectfully as she pressed up to her master. He, whose recent
excesses in wine had re-established Juno in the plenitude of her favour, saw with approving
calmness his female friend lay both her fore-paws on the table--and appropriate all that remained
on his plate, to the extreme astonishment of all present.

'My friend,' said Mr. Jeremiah, to a footman who was on the point of pulling away the unbidden
guest, 'don't you, for God's sake, get into any trouble. My Juno understands no jesting on
these occasions: and it might so happen that she would leave a mark of her remembrance with
you, that you would not forget so long as you lived.'

'But I suppose, Sir, you won't expect that a dog can be allowed to sup with her Highness's
company!'

'Oh! faith, Sir, credit me--the dog is a more respectable member of society than yourself,
and many a one here present: so just leave me and my Juno unmolested. Else I may, perhaps,
take the trouble to make an example of you.'

The princess, whose attention was now drawn, made a sign to the servant to retire; and Von
Pilsen and his friends could scarcely keep down their laughter to a well-bred key, when Mr.
Schnackenberger drew his pipe from his pocket--loaded it--lit it at one of the chandeliers
over the supper-table--and, in one minute, wrapped the whole neighbourhood in a voluminous
cloud of smoke.

As some little damper to their merriment, however, Mr. Schnackenberger addressed a few words
to them from time to time:--'You laugh, gentlemen,' said he; 'and, doubtless, there's something
or other very amusing,--no doubt, infinitely amusing, if one could but find it out. However,
I could make your appetites for laughing vanish--aye, vanish in one moment. For, understand
me now, one word--one little word from me to Juno, and, in two minutes, the whole room shall
be as empty as if it had been swept out with a broom. Just the first that I look at, no matter
whom, she catches by the breast--aye, just you, Sir, or you, Sir, or you, Mr. Von Pilsen,'
(fixing his eye upon him) 'if I do but say--seize him, Juno!' The word had fled: and in the
twinkling of an eye, Juno's fore-paws, not over clean, were fixed in the elegant white silk
waistcoat of Mr. Von Pilsen.

This scene was the signal for universal uproar and alarm. Even Mr. Jeremiah, on remarking the
general rising of the company, though totally unaware that his harmless sport had occasioned
it, rose also; called the dog off: and comforted Von Pilsen, who was half dead with fright,
by assuring him that had he but said--'Bite him, Juno!'--matters would have ended far worse.

On Mr. Schnackenberger's standing up, his bodily equilibrium was manifestly so much endangered,
that one of the company, out of mere humanity, offered his servant to see him safe home. A
slight consciousness of his own condition induced our hero to accept of this offer: through
some misunderstanding, however, the servant led him, not to the Golden Sow, but to the Double-barrelled
Gun.

Mr. Schnackenberger, on being asked for his number, said 'No. 5;' that being the number of
his room at the Golden Sow. He was accordingly shown up to No. 5: and, finding a bed under
an alcove, he got into it dressed as he was; and, in one moment, had sunk into a profound slumber.

CHAPTER X.

WHICH NARRATES AN ENGAGEMENT ON UNEQUAL TERMS--FIRST FOR ONE SIDE, THEN FOR THE OTHER. I think that I'm hearing. It was the day before
leaving for the restrooms. Came to buy some artificial flowers. He spoke of you and said ... What
a laugh! ... you said it was a corny!

Rosalia froze. That phrase struck to the quick of his soul. Like Stab never received. And when
hurrying down the stairs, the pain of that wound tormented self-esteem more than he received in his
honor. A cheesy! The awful anathema was fixed in his mind, which should be left as an eternal
sign stamped on fire meat.

"My God, what I experienced today only you know ... I think I have gone gray - I thought to go
by car to the house of Torquemada -. What Golgotha ​​!...».

And he went and came eagerly, because they had already struck three. But he was lucky to find
the Inquisitor, impatient and ready to go to the Palace. Was smiling and asked the the health of
the family. The worship of the donut shaped with the fingers not
mortified as well as other days.

The taste of averting this great peril and rid itself of such creditor unsympathetic, not allowed
to look at externalities more or less fulsome. Shortening the session as possible, be dismissed.
The humiliation of that day were so nervous ...!

"No Miracles might have said that about me - I thought, Palace road, tormented by Registration
horrible that burned his face -. It is a lie of that rascal ... What day! When I get home
the first thing I see is if I was filled with gray. The thing is
not has been for less.

"

The first thing he did was look in the mirror. Put it to the relief of the ladies that similar situation
could see. He had not left any channels. And if you left, no you know. And if it is known, it would
have already searched through cover them.

What it is beyond doubt is that as a result of the setbacks of those days the lady was so flat
and listless with the spirits so that her husband came to figure who had lost his health. "You have
something, I do not deny it. Want to come the doctor? ... You see, if you had taken baths Jeronimos,
you sing a different story. " But she claimed having nothing, and if not objected to the doctor
to come, nor any condition stated in this final. It was all kinds of rogues nerves, those devils
that play in disturbing the ladies who, if not help them in their dissimulation. The unease
positive Bringas was that of sadness, fear of everything and the slightest cause, loss of appetite,
mainly a special and very new to consider your husband. If the estimate that he felt there was
a considerable decrease, the outward forms of respect and accused some refinement study. A number of
trials are given this, but unable to put in light of evidence the causes of such sybaritic external
affections, we must resort to the hypothesis, and see in them something akin to the blandishments
that are used for religious instruction to an employee of Customs
when you want to smuggle. Rosalia proved peaceful and venal system
for the stash their rags. Was gradually displaying them. Every day
repairing D. Francisco something new, locking a discussion that she
was trying to appease with graceful touch and lies and sweetish terms.
But not always succeed, and the honest gentleman came to be seriously
worried those going out to scuttle luxuries, such as theaters surprises.
 And after all this, there are you hopping away at the ball wi'
some painted doll--looking babies in her eyes--quite forgetting me that has to sit up for you
at home pining and grieving: and all isn't enough, but at last you must trot off to another inn.'

'What then,' said Mr. Schnackenberger, 'is it fact that I'm not at the Golden Sow?'

'Charming!' said Mrs. Sweetbread; 'and so you would make believe you don't know it; but I shall
match you, or find them as will: rest you sure of that.'

'Children!' said Mr. Schnackenberger to the waiter and boots, who were listening in astonishment
with the door half-open; 'of all loves, rid me of this monster.'

'Aye, what!' said she in a voice of wrath; and put herself on the defensive. But a word or
two of abuse against the landlord of the Double-barrelled Gun, which escaped her in her heat,
irritated the men to that degree, that in a few moments afterwards Mrs. Sweetbread was venting
her wrath in the street--to the wonder of all passers-by, who looked after her until she vanished
into the house of a well-known attorney.

Meantime, Mr. Schnackenberger, having on inquiry learned from the waiter in what manner he
had come to the inn--and the night-scene which had followed, was apologizing to the owner of
No. 5,--when, to his great alarm the church clock struck eleven. 'Nine,' he remembered, was
the hour fixed by the billet: and the more offence he might have given to the princess by his
absurdities over-night, of which he had some obscure recollection, so much the more necessary
was it that he should keep the appointment. The botanic garden was two miles off: so, shutting
up Juno, he ordered a horse: and in default of boots, which, alas! existed no longer in that
shape, he mounted in silk stockings and pumps; and rode off at a hand gallop.

CHAPTER XII.

MR. SCHNACKENBERGER'S ENGAGEMENT WITH AN OLD BUTTERWOMAN.

The student was a good way advanced on his road, when he descried the princess, attended by
another lady and a gentleman approaching in an open carriage. As soon, however, as he was near
enough to be recognised by the party in the carriage, the princess turned away her head with
manifest signs of displeasure--purely, as it appeared, to avoid noticing Mr. Jeremiah. Scarcely,
however, was the carriage past him, together with Mr. Von Pilsen, who galloped by him in a
tumult of laughter, when the ill-fate of our hero so ordered it, that all eyes which would
not notice him for his honour should be reverted upon his disgrace. The white turnpike gate
so frightened our rider's horse, that he positively refused to pass it: neither whip nor spur
would bring him to reason. Meantime, up comes an old butterwoman.[23] At the very moment when
she was passing, the horse in his panic steps back and deposits one of his hind legs in the
basket of the butterwoman: down comes the basket with all its eggs, rotten and sound; and down
comes the old woman, squash, into the midst of them. "Murder! Murder!" shouted the butterwoman;
and forthwith every individual thing that could command a pair or two pair of legs ran out
of the turnpike-house; the carriage of the princess drew up, to give the ladies a distant view
of Mr. Schnackenberger engaged with the butterwoman; and Mr. Von Pilsen wheeled his horse round
into a favourable station for seeing anything the ladies might overlook. Rage gave the old
butterwoman strength; she jumped up nimbly, and seized Mr. Schnackenberger so stoutly by the
laps of his coat, that he vainly endeavoured to extricate himself from her grasp. At this crisis,
up came Juno, and took her usual side in such disputes. But to do this with effect, Juno found
it necessary first of all to tear off the coat lap; for, the old woman keeping such firm hold
of it, how else could Juno lay her down on her back--set her paws upon her breast--and then
look up to her master, as if asking for a certificate of having acquitted herself to his satisfaction?

[23] In the original--'eine marketenderin,' a female sutler: but I have altered it, to save
an explanation of what the old sutler was after.

To rid himself of spectators, Mr. Jeremiah willingly paid the old woman the full amount of
her demand, and then returned to the city. It disturbed him greatly, however, that the princess
should thus again have seen him under circumstances of disgrace. Anxious desire to lay open
his heart before her--and to place himself in a more advantageous light, if not as to his body,
yet at all events as to his intellect--determined him to use his utmost interest with her to
obtain a private audience; 'at which,' thought he, 'I can easily beg her pardon for having
overslept the appointed hour.'

CHAPTER XIII.

IN WHICH GOOD LUCK AND BAD LUCK ARE DISTRIBUTED IN EQUAL PROPORTIONS.

The good luck seemed to have anticipated Mr. Schnackenberger's nearest wishes. For on reaching
the Double-barrelled Gun, whither he arrived without further disturbance than that of the general
gazing to which he was exposed by the fragment of a coat which survived from the late engagement,
a billet was put into his hands of the following tenor: 'Come and explain this evening, if
you can explain, your astonishing neglect of this morning's appointment. I shall be at the
theatre; and shall do what I can to dismiss my attendants.'

But bad luck came also--in the person of a lawyer. The lawyer stated that he called on the
part of the landlady of the Golden Sow, to put the question for the last time in civil terms,
'whether Mr. Schnackenberger were prepared to fulfil those just expectations which he had raised
in her heart; or whether she must be compelled to pursue her claims by due course of law.'

Mr. Schnackenberger was beginning to launch out with great fury upon the shameless and barefaced
impudence of such expectations: but the attorney interrupted him; and observed with provoking
coolness, 'that there was no occasion for any warmth--no occasion in the world; that certainly
Mrs. Sweetbread could not have framed these expectations wholly out of the air: something (and
he grinned sarcastically), something, it must be supposed, had passed: now, for instance, this
wedding-shirt of the late Mr. Sweetbread--she would hardly, I think, have resigned this to
your use, Mr. Schnackenberger, unless some engagements had preceded either in the shape of
words or of actions. However, said he, this is no part of my business: what remains for me
to do on this occasion is to present her account; and let me add, that I am instructed to say
that, if you come to a proper understanding with her on the first point, no further notice
will be taken of this last part of my client's demand.

The unfortunate Mr. Schnackenberger considered the case most ruefully and in awful perturbation.
He perspired exceedingly. However, at length--'Come, I don't care,' said he, 'I know what I'll
do:' and then sitting down, he drew up a paper, which he presented to Mr. Attorney; at the
same time, explaining to him that, rather than be exposed in a court of justice as a supposed
lover of Mrs. Sweetbread's, he was content to pay the monstrous charges of her bill without
applying to a magistrate for his revision: but upon this condition only, that Mrs. Sweetbread
should for herself, heirs, and assigns, execute a general release with regard to Mr. Jeremiah
Schnackenberger's body, according to the form here drawn up by himself, and should engage on
no pretence whatever to set up any claim to him in times to come. An account book was laundress open on the
bedside table showing female letter notes: Chambre 6; petticoats 14, etc ... The pedestal was
made of iron with black lacquer and painted flowers. On the mantelpiece, a clock unworthily
elegant bronze alternated with two gold china dogs, a very bad taste, with broken ears. The
blades of the walls were crooked, and one of the curtains torn, stained floor, the pendant with
the tube ahumadísimo. For the poor ajar bedroom door was a bed large, golden, imperial armor,
without undoing and clothes in disarray, as if someone had finished up.

Refugio believed that he visited Mrs. Bringas, yielding at last to their bodies, to view the
articles in your industry.

"You've come a bit late - he said -. Do you know that I'm selling everything? I'm no good for
this. Do not know what I was thinking about my sister when I did I could get Trader ... For you
to take charge ... since I'm in, I have not done more than lose money, just pay, and I have no
genius to bother ... So quit sooner of these rags, the better.

Many women have come, and go taking what little I have left. "

- However - Rosalie said, pulling a box number and aigrettes marabouts and other links and cords
- there are still some very nice here.

- Do you like you said these aigrettes ?...-- Refugio, joyful to be
lavish with it -.

You can take them ... is the gift.

- Oh, no ... missing no more ...

- Yes, yes, I have much pleasure in it.

For some I buy it and not pay, it is better ... Look here - said going to the room - I also
give this hat is not fixed, but can you take the tape you want.

Rosalia, this generosity astonished and somewhat willing to look with eyes more Refugio benevolent,
insisted on rejecting the gifts.

"Do I snubs you because I am poor?" - He said with steely counterclaim.

If Rosalie had not gone to see in order to know, if your desire for
money provided not such that forced her to go through, it might have
rejected the subtleties with this woman, so inferior to her in every
way, I wanted to climb up to high field; but would not show disdain
at the time to ask a favor ... And what for so demeaning! When it
came to mind the idea of ​​making his request, his whole being soaked
in disgust, as if you enter the pores and bitter liquor disgusting
and run down their veins and climbed to the palate. Several times
he made his demand for forces faltáronle it. Even thought to say nothing
and get away from that house. But the inflexible logic of its necessity
the moored there, and seeing no other choice commitment, Eral forced
to go through with that calyx. "Since I made the sacrifice to come
- I thought - no I will not try his luck." No, Sir, do as I bid you; just bring me the dreadnought and
a round hat.'

The waiter obeyed: and, although the dreadnought was by one good ell too short, yet Mr. Jeremiah
exulted in his strange apparel, because he flattered himself that in such a disguise he could
preserve a strict incognito; with a view to which he also left Juno behind, recommending her
to the vigilant attentions of the waiter.

CHAPTER XV.

WHICH CONTAINS A PLAY WITHIN A PLAY.

All the world was astonished, when from the door of the Double-barrelled Gun a man stepped
forth on the hottest day in August, arrayed as for a Siberian winter in a dreadnought, guarded
with furs, and a hat pressed down, so as almost to cover his face. The train of curious persons
who attended his motions naturally grew larger at every step.

Whosoever had hitherto doubted whether this man were mad--doubted no longer when he was seen
to enter the theatre; where in the lightest summer-clothing the heat was scarcely supportable.

Within the theatre, the attention of all people was directed so undividedly upon himself, that
even Mr. Schnackenberger began to opine that he had undertaken something extraordinary: so
much the more, thought he, will it be prudent to hide my face, that I may not again compromise
my dignity in the presence of her Highness. But this concealment of his face raised the strongest
suspicions against him. Throughout the whole house--pit--boxes--and galleries--there was but
one subject of conversation, viz. the man in the dreadnought; and, whilst in all other parts
the house was crowded to excess, upon his bench no soul would sit: and he created as much superfluity
of room as he had found at the Golden Sow. At length the manager waited upon him, and requested
that he would either retire from the theatre, or that he would explain what could have induced
him to make his appearance in a costume which had spread alarm and anxiety through the public
mind; and which was likely to do a serious injury to the receipts of the night.

At this moment several children began to cry--taking him for black[25] Robert. The consequence
was, that, as they could not be pacified, the first scene was mere dumb show to the audience;
and some giddy young people set up a loud 'off, off, Dreadnought!' which cry was instantly
seconded by the public. Nevertheless, as the princess at that instant entered her box, Mr.
Schnackenberger, however hard pressed, thought it became him to maintain his post to the last
extremity. This extremity forthwith appeared in the shape of three armed soldiers, who, on
behalf of the police, took him into custody. Possibly Mr. Jeremiah might have shown himself
less tractable to the requests of these superannuated antiquities--but for two considerations;
first, that an opportunity might thus offer of exchanging his dreadnought for a less impressive
costume; and, secondly, that in case of his declining to accompany them, he saw signs abroad
that a generous and enlightened public did very probably purpose to kick him out; a conjecture
which was considerably strengthened by the universal applause which attended his exit at quick
time.

[25] In the original Knecht Rupert. The allusion is to an old Christmas usage of North Germany:
a person comes in disguise, in the character of an ambassador from heaven, with presents for
all the young children who are reported to him as good and obedient: but those who are naughty
he threatens and admonishes. See Coleridge's Friend, vol. ii. p. 322.

Mr. Schnackenberger was escorted by an immense retinue of old street-padders and youthful mud-larks
to the city gaol. His own view of the case was, that the public had been guilty of a row, and
ought to be arrested. But the old Mayor, who was half-deaf, comprehended not a syllable of
what he said: all his remonstrances about 'pressing business' went for nothing: and, when he
made a show of escaping upon seeing the gloomy hole into which he was now handed, his worship
threatened him with drawing out the city guard.

From one of this respectable body, who brought him straw to lie upon, and the wretched prison
allowance of food, he learned that his examination could not take place that day nor even the
next; for the next was a holiday, on which Mr. Mayor never did any business. On receiving this
dolorous information, Mr. Schnackenberger's first impulse was to knock down his informant and
run away: but a moment's consideration satisfied him--that, though he might by this means escape
from his cell, he could have no chance of forcing the prison gates.

CHAPTER XVI.

IN WHAT WAY MR. JEREMIAH ESCAPES; AND WHAT HE FINDS IN THE STREET.

A most beautiful moonlight began at this juncture to throw its beams in the prison, when Mr.
Schnackenberger, starting up from his sleepless couch, for pure rage, seized upon the iron
bars of his window, and shook them with a fervent prayer, that instead of bars it had pleased
God to put Mr. Mayor within his grasp. To his infinite astonishment, the bars were more obedient
to his wrath than could have been expected. One shake more, and like a row of carious teeth
they were all in Mr. Schnackenberger's hand.

It may be supposed that Mr. Schnackenberger lost no time in using his good fortune; indeed,
a very slight jump would suffice to place him at liberty. Accordingly, when the sentinel had
retired to a little distance, he flung his dreadnought out of the window--leaped upon it--and
stood without injury on the outside of the prison.

'Who goes there?' cried the alarmed sentinel, coyly approaching the spot from which the noise
issued.

'Nobody,' said the fugitive: and by way of answer to the challenge--'Speak, or I must fire'--which
tremulously issued from the lips of the city hero, Mr. Schnackenberger, gathering up his dreadnought
to his breast, said in a hollow voice, 'Fellow, thou art a dead man.'

Straightway the armed man fell upon his knees before him, and cried out--'ah! gracious Sir!
have mercy upon me. I am a poor wig-maker; and a bad trade it is; and I petitioned his worship,
and have done for this many a year, to be taken into the city guard; and yesterday I passed--'

'Passed what?'

'Passed my examination, your honour:--his worship put me through the manual exercise: and I
was 'triculated into the corps. It would be a sad thing, your honour, to lose my life the very
next day after I was 'triculated.'

'Well,' said Mr. Jeremiah, who with much ado forbore laughing immoderately, 'for this once
I shall spare your life: but then remember--not a word, no sound or syllable.'

'Not one, your honour, I vow to heaven.'

'And down upon the spot deliver me your coat, side arms, and hat.'

But the martial wig-maker protested that, being already ill of a cold, he should, without all
doubt, perish if he were to keep guard in his shirt-sleeves.

'Well, in that case, this dreadnought will be a capital article: allow me to prescribe it--it's
an excellent sudorific.'

Necessity has no law: and so, to save his life, the city hero, after some little struggle,
submitted to this unusual exchange.

'Very good!' said Mr. Schnackenberger, as the warrior in the dreadnought, after mounting his
round hat, again shouldered his musket:--'Now, good-night;' and so saying, he hastened off
to the residence of the Mayor.

CHAPTER XVII.

MR. JEREMIAH'S NIGHT INTERVIEW WITH THE MAYOR UPON STATE AFFAIRS.

'Saints in heaven! is this the messenger of the last day?' screamed out a female voice, as
the doorbell rang out a furious alarum--peal upon peal--under that able performer, Mr. Jeremiah
Schnackenberger. She hastened to open the door; but, when she beheld a soldier in the state
uniform, she assured him it was all over with him; for his worship was gone to bed; and, when
that was the case, he never allowed of any disturbance without making an example.

'Aye, but I come upon state business.'

'No matter,' said the old woman, 'it's all one: when his worship sleeps, business must sleep:
that's the law, I'll assure you, and has been any time since I can think on. He always commits,
at the least.'

'Very likely; but I must speak to him.'

'Well, then, take the consequences on yourself,' said she: 'recollect, you're a state soldier;
you'll be brought to a court-martial; you'll be shot.'

'Ah! well: that's my concern.'

'Mighty well,' said the old woman: 'one may as well speak to the wind. However, I'll get out
the way: I'll not come near the hurricane. And don't you say, I didn't warn you.'

So saying, she let him up to her master's bed-room door, and then trotted off as fast and as
far as she could.

At this moment Mr. Mayor, already wakened and discomposed by the violent tintinnabulation,
rushed out: 'What!' said he, 'am I awake? Is it a guardsman that has this audacity?'

'No guardsman, Mr. Mayor,' said our hero; in whose face his worship was vainly poring with
the lamp to spell out the features of some one amongst the twelve members of the state-guard;
'no guardsman, but a gentleman that was apprehended last night at the theatre.'

'Ah!' said the Mayor, trembling in every limb, 'a prisoner, and escaped? And perhaps has murdered
the guard?--What would you have of me--me, a poor, helpless, unfortunate man?'

And, at every word he spoke, he continued to step back towards a bell that lay upon the table.

'Basta,' said Mr. Schnackenberger, taking the bell out of his hands. 'Mr. Mayor, I'm just the
man in the dreadnought. And I've a question to ask you, Mr. Mayor; and I thought it was rather
long to wait until morning; so I took the liberty of coming for an answer to-night; and I'd
think myself particularly obliged to you for it now:--Upon what authority do you conceive yourself
entitled to commit me, an innocent man, and without a hearing, to an abominable hole of a dungeon?
I have not murdered the guard, Mr. Mayor: but I troubled him for his regimental coat, that
I might gain admittance to your worship: and I left him the dreadnought in exchange.'

'The dreadnought?' said the Mayor. 'Aye: now this very dreadnought it was, Sir, that compelled
me (making a low bow) to issue my warrant for your apprehension.' And it then came out, that
in a list of stolen goods recently lodged with the magistrates, a dreadnought was particularly
noticed: and Mr. Mayor having seen a man enter the theatre in an article answering to the description,
and easily identified by a black cross embroidered upon the back, was obliged by his duty to
have him arrested; more especially as the wearer had increased the suspicion against himself
by concealing his face.

This explanation naturally reconciled Mr. Schnackenberger to the arrest: and as to the filthy
dungeon, that admitted of a still simpler apology, as it seemed that the town afforded no better.

'Why then, Mr. Mayor,--as things stand, it seems to me that in the point of honour I ought
to be satisfied: and in that case I still consider myself your prisoner, and shall take up
my quarters for this night in your respectable mansion.'

'But no!' thought Mr. Mayor: 'better let a rogue escape, than keep a man within my doors that
may commit a murder on my body.' So he assured Mr. Schnackenberger--that he had accounted in
the most satisfactory manner for being found in possession of the dreadnought; took down the
name of the old clothesman from whom it was hired; and lighting down his now discharged prisoner,
he declared, with a rueful attempt at smiling, that it gave him the liveliest gratification
on so disagreeable an occasion to have made so very agreeable an acquaintance.

CHAPTER XVIII.

MISERY ACQUAINTS MR. SCHNACKENBERGER WITH STRANGE BEDFELLOWS.

When Mr. Schnackenberger returned home from his persecutions, he found the door of the Double-barrelled
Gun standing wide open: and, as he had observed a light in his own room, he walked right up-stairs
without disturbing the sleeping waiter. But to his great astonishment, two gigantic fellows
were posted outside the door; who, upon his affirming that he must be allowed to enter his
own room, seemed in some foreign and unintelligible language to support the negative of that
proposition. Without further scruple or regard to their menacing gestures, he pressed forwards
to the chamber door; but immediately after felt himself laid hold of by the two fellows--one
at his legs, the other at his head--and, spite of his most indignant protests, carried down-stairs
into the yard. There he was tumbled into a little dépôt for certain four-footed animals--with
whose golden representative he had so recently formed an acquaintance no less intimate;--and,
the height of the building not allowing of his standing upright, he was disposed to look back
with sorrow to the paradise lost of his station upon the back of the quiet animal whom he had
ridden on the preceding day. Even the dungeon appeared an elysium in comparison with his present
lodgings, where he felt the truth of the proverb brought home to him--that it is better to
be alone than in bad company.

Unfortunately, the door being fastened on the outside, there remained nothing else for him
to do than to draw people to the spot by a vehement howling. But the swine being disturbed
by this unusual outcry, and a general uproar taking place among the inhabitants of the stye,
Mr. Schnackenberger's single voice, suffocated by rage, was over-powered by the swinish accompaniment.
Some little attention was, however, drawn to the noise amongst those who slept near to the
yard: but on the waiter's assuring them that it was 'only a great pig who would soon be quiet,'
that the key could not be found, and no locksmith was in the way at that time of night, the
remonstrants were obliged to betake themselves to the same remedy of patience, which by this
time seemed to Mr. Jeremiah also the sole remedy left to himself.

CHAPTER XIX.

WHOSE END RECONCILES OUR HERO WITH ITS BEGINNING.

Mr. Schnackenberger's howling had (as the waiter predicted) gradually died away, and he was
grimly meditating on his own miseries, to which he had now lost all hope of seeing an end before
daylight, when the sudden rattling of a key at the yard door awakened flattering hopes in his
breast. It proved to be the waiter, who came to make a gaol delivery--and on letting him out
said, 'I am commissioned by the gentlemen to secure your silence;' at the same time putting
into his hand a piece of gold.

'The d----l take your gold!' said Mr. Schnackenberger: 'is this the practice at your house--first
to abuse your guests, and then have the audacity to offer them money?'

'Lord, protect us!' said the waiter, now examining his face, 'is it you? but who would ever
have looked for you in such a dress as this? The gentlemen took you for one of the police.
Lord! to think what a trouble you'll have had!'

And it now came out, that a party of foreigners had pitched upon Mr. Jeremiah's room as a convenient
one for playing at hazard and some other forbidden games; and to prevent all disturbance from
the police, had posted their servants, who spoke not a word of German, as sentinels at the door.

'But how came you to let my room for such a purpose?'

'Because we never expected to see you to-night; we had heard that the gentleman in the dreadnought
had been taken up at the theatre, and committed. But the gentlemen are all gone now; and the
room's quite at your service.'

Mr. Schnackenberger, however, who had lost the first part of the night's sleep from suffering,
was destined to lose the second from pleasure: for the waiter now put into his hands the following
billet: 'No doubt you must have waited for me to no purpose in the passages of the theatre:
but alas! our firmest resolutions we have it not always in our power to execute; and on this
occasion, I found it quite impossible consistently with decorum to separate myself from my
attendants. Will you therefore attend the hunt to-morrow morning? there I hope a better opportunity
will offer.'

It added to his happiness on this occasion that the princess had manifestly not detected him
as the man in the dreadnought.

CHAPTER XX.

IN WHICH MR. SCHNACKENBERGER ACTS UPON THE AMBITIOUS FEELINGS OF A MAN IN OFFICE FOR AN AMIABLE
PURPOSE.

Next morning, when the Provost-marshal came to fetch back the appointments of the military
wig-maker, it struck our good-natured student that he had very probably brought the poor fellow
into an unpleasant scrape. He felt, therefore, called upon as a gentleman, to wait upon the
Mayor, and do his best to beg him off. In fact, he arrived just in time: for all the arrangements
were complete for demonstrating to the poor wig-maker, by an à posteriori line of argument,
the importance of valour in his new employment.

Mr. Schnackenberger entreated the Mayor to be lenient: courage, he said, was not every man's
business: as a wig-maker, the prisoner could have had little practice in that virtue: the best
of wigs were often made by cowards: 'and even as a soldier,' said he, 'it's odds if there should
be such another alarm for the next hundred years.' But all in vain: his judge was too much
incensed: 'Such a scandalous dereliction of duty!' said he; 'No, no: I must make an example
of him.'

Hereupon, Mr. Jeremiah observed, that wig-makers were not the only people who sometimes failed
in the point of courage: 'Nay,' said he, 'I have known even mayors who by no means shone in
that department of duty: and in particular, I am acquainted with some who would look exceedingly
blue, aye d----lish blue indeed, if a student whom I have the honour to know should take it
into his head to bring before the public a little incident in which they figured, embellished
with wood-cuts, representing a retreat by forced marches towards a bell in the background.'

Mr. Mayor changed colour; and pausing a little to think, at length he said--'Sir, you are in
the right; every man has his weak moments. But it would be unhandsome to expose them to the
scoffs of the public.'

'Why, yes, upon certain conditions.'

'Which conditions I comply with,' said his worship; and forthwith he commuted the punishment
for a reprimand and a short confinement.

On these terms Mr. Schnackenberger assured him of his entire silence with respect to all that
had passed.

CHAPTER XXI.

IN WHICH THE HOPES OF TWO LOVERS ARE WRECKED AT ONCE.

'Beg your pardon, Sir, are you Mr. Schnackenberger?' said a young man to our hero, as he was
riding out of the city gate.

'Yes, Sir, I'm the man; what would you have with me?' and, at the same time looking earnestly
at him, he remembered his face amongst the footmen on the birth-night.

'At the Forester's house--about eleven o'clock,' whispered the man mysteriously.

'Very good,' said Mr. Schnackenberger, nodding significantly; and forthwith, upon the wings
of rapturous anticipation, he flew to the place of rendezvous. Hence, many water systems entirely from different and even opposing,
corresponding to the basins of the Rhine, the Danube, the Po and the Rhone. In the Alps, granite
is the most unique element of the geological formations, and as in the absence of regular terrain
forms and directions in the structure of rocks are rare regular and horizontal stratifications.
There are the terrible glaciers, deserts and bleak moors, refrigerators mysterious perpetual motion,
so vast and great that some are up to 18 miles in length in various directions, comprising more
than one-tenth of the land surface. Elevations are generally very significant, telling many
of 3, 4 and 4,500 meters above sea level. In these Queen tops perpetual winter, with more rigor
than at the poles, the man is banned from there, the vegetation offers the most varied gradations
scale is possible in the area temperate northern hemisphere.

Swiss Alps is emerging almost all major rivers of Europe, bringing
fertility and move to the regions most opposed.

The only complicated and wonderful group for a relay system, extends from the eastern end of St.
Gotthard to the heights of Sidelhorit (via Matthorn and Gries, Diechterhorn and Grimsel), gives
rise to the following rivers that make the most opposite directions:

To the south, the Ticino, the Maggia and the Tosa and Tocci, who carry
their waters are Lake Maggiore and then the main flow of the Po.

South-west, the Rhone, which will fill the great basin of Lake Geneva or Geneva, and runs its
course in France to the Gulf of Lyon.

To the west, or Aare Aare, which widened after the lakes of Thun and
Brienz and Bathing Bern and Solera (or Solothurn Solothurn) flows
into the Rhine between Schaffhausen and Basel.

To the north, the Reuss River that feeds into the lake of Four Cantons
(or Lucerne), escapes of the basin in the middle of the city of that
name and goes to swell the Aar, not far from the confluence the Limmat.

Finally,

in the northeast, the sources of the Rhine, called the upper and middle
Rhine.

Do not forget that the Swiss canton of Graubünden will send to your most important Upper Danube
tributary, the Inn.

Thus, the Alps of Switzerland nomas arise headwaters, on the Danube, Rhine, Rhone and Po, are the floods
from the heart of Europe to the faraway basins Black Sea and the North, the Mediterranean and
the Adriatic.

The Jura Mountains have another character. Of them does not arise any major river system; perpetual
refrigerators absolutely missing from their peaks, limestone formations replace to those of granite
disordered groups, complicated and there are very steep, but instead turn three parallel mountain ranges
and uneven extension: two of 15 miles each, and 18 which goes to Schaffhausen. The highest summit
of the Jura no exceed an elevation of 1.720 meters above sea level,
and the total thickness of three chains does not exceed 55 kilometers,
while the Alps have a thickness of 112 to 285 kilometers.

Finally, the vegetation of Jura is much less diverse, by the fact that its less numerous high.

The
region intermediate or low Switzerland (formed mainly by the cantons of Vaud, Fribourg, Bern,
Solera, Lucerne, Zug, district in Zurich, Aargau and Thurgau) consists, as I said, of undulating,
narrow and shallow valleys, hills and inclines, with an elevation above sea level varying between
250 and 390 meters, and mountains gives the height of which exceeds 975. All that smiling and picturesque
region is heavily populated and cultivated, and is part of a west side line of Lakes Geneva,
Neuchâtel and Biel Aar and bass - the other eastern line, part of Lake Geneva and ending on
top of Constanza, tour of Thun, Brienz, Lucerne, Zug and Zurich.

As I mentioned a few lakes, say something more about all that is Switzerland. The territory of
the Confederation contains, in whole or in part, 18 lakes of the first order (Though very unequal
in extent), 9 of the second order and more than 60 of the third, almost relatively to the first
microscopic. Almost all first class are navigated by steamboats and yachts, some are only crossed
by little boats or paddle canoes insignificant as many lacks any navigation. The multitude of lakes
third order is in lofty mazes of the Alps, in the headwaters of the rivers or the bottom of
the fridge. In the rear, and standing upon the steps of the Forester's
house, stood Von Pilsen and his party, convulsed with laughter; immediately below them was
the whole body of the hunters, who had called here for refreshment--upon whose faces struggled
a mixed expression of merriment and wonder: and at the head of the whole company stood a party
of butchers and butchers' boys returning from the hunt, whose fierce looks and gestures made
it evident that they sympathized with the wrongs of Mrs. Sweetbread, the relict of a man who
had done honour to their body--and were prepared to avenge them in any way she might choose.
She, meantime, whose whole mighty love was converted into mighty hatred by the opprobrious
words and fierce repulse of Mr. Schnackenberger, called heaven and earth, and all present,
to witness her wrongs; protested that he had himself appointed the meeting at the Forest-house;
and in confirmation drew forth a letter.

At sight of the letter, a rattling peal of laughter from Mr. Von Pilsen left no room to doubt,
in our student's mind, from whose witty manufactory it issued; and a rattling peal of wrath
from the butchers' boys left no room to doubt in anybody's mind what would be its consequences.
The letter was, in fact, pretty much what Mrs. Sweetbread alleged: it contained a large and
unlimited offer of Mr. Schnackenberger's large and unlimited person; professed an ardour of
passion which could brook no delay; and entreated her to grant him an interview for the final
arrangement of all preliminaries at the Forest-house.

Whilst this letter was reading, Mr. Schnackenberger perceived that there was no time to be
lost: no Juno, unfortunately, was present, no 'deus ex machinâ' to turn the scale of battle,
which would obviously be too unequal, and in any result (considering the quality of the assailants)
not very glorious. So, watching his opportunity, he vaulted into his saddle, and shot off like
an arrow. Up went the roar of laughter from Von Pilsen and the hunters: up went the roar of
fury from the butchers and their boys: in the twinkling of an eye all were giving chase; showers
of stones sang through the trees; threats of vengeance were in his ears; butchers' dogs were
at his horse's heels; butchers' curses were on the wind; a widow's cries hung upon his flight.
The hunters joined in the pursuit; a second chase was before them; Mr. Pilsen had furnished
them a second game. Again did Mr. Schnackenberger perspire exceedingly; once again did Mr.
Schnackenberger 'funk' enormously; yet, once again did Mr. Schnackenberger shiver at the remembrance
of the Golden Sow, and groan at the name of Sweetbread. He retained, however, presence of mind
enough to work away at his spurs incessantly; nor ever once turned his head until he reached
the city gates, which he entered at the pas de charge, thanking heaven that he was better mounted
than on his first arrival at B----.

CHAPTER XXII.

IT NEVER RAINS BUT IT POURS.

Rapidly as Mr. Schnackenberger drove through the gates, he was arrested by the voice of the
warder, who cited him to instant attendance at the town-hall. Within the memory of man, this
was the first time that any business had been transacted on a holiday; an extraordinary sitting
was now being held; and the prisoner under examination was----Juno. 'Oh! heaven and its mercies!
when will my afflictions cease?' said the exhausted student; 'when shall I have a respite?'
Respite there could be none at present; for the case was urgent; and, unless Juno could find
good bail, she was certain of being committed on three very serious charges of 1. trespass;
2. assault and battery; 3. stealing in a dwelling-house. The case was briefly this: Juno had
opened so detestable an overture of howling on her master's departure for the forest, that
the people at the Double-barrelled Gun, out of mere consideration for the city of B----, had
found it necessary to set her at liberty; whereupon, as if the devil drove her, forthwith the
brute had gone off in search of her old young enemy the kitten, at the hotel of the princess.
She beat up the kitten's quarters again; and again she drove in the enemy pell-mell into her
camp in the kitchen. The young mistress of the kitten, out of her wits at seeing her darling's
danger, had set down a pail of milk, in which she was washing a Brussels' veil and a quantity
of Mechlin lace belonging to the princess--and hurried her kitten into a closet. In a moment
she returned, and found--milk, Brussels' veil, Mechlin lace, vanished--evaporated into Juno's
throat, 'abiit--evasit--excessit--erupit!' only the milk-pail, upon some punctilio of delicacy
in Juno, was still there; and Juno herself stood by, complacently licking her milky lips, and
expressing a lively satisfaction with the texture of Flanders' manufactures. The
other lakes belong exclusively to the Confederation.

       

* * * * *

The fact of being Switzerland in the temperate zone, while it has such high mountains of the most
varied settings, gives the unique advantage of having, during the spring, summer and autumn, three
elements of climacteric variety of vegetation and consequently, industries, customs, etc.
The stations produced under the latitude and developments the globe are constantly modified
in Switzerland, more than any other country in Europe, by the influence of the heights and exposure
of the sites. Thus, the territory Switzerland has three simultaneous temperatures of the first
order, determined by the sun, the height air and air currents descending
from the icy mountains anchovies or narrow gorges.

With the exception of fruits vegetables exclusive to the tropics, grow the air in Switzerland
free all plants that can live from the lower area of ​​the vineyards to the regions the North Pole.
I have seen flourish in the ground, on the banks of Lake Leman, orange, pomegranates and other
fruit trees and shrubs ostenian abundant in Italy and Spain. It is not therefore surprising that Switzerland
is so picturesque, offering the most varied landscapes topography and vegetation, from the deep
valley and the undulating plain to the granite peaks, completely
black and sharp, and the eternal snow domes which are lost in the
abyss the atmosphere, almost never trodden by man. If not'--and
then Mr. Deputy paused for effect, and struck the table with his fist--'if not, and such principles
of Jacobinism and French philosophy are to be tolerated; then, I say, there is an end to social
order and religion: Sansculotterie, Septemberising, and red night-caps, will flourish over
once happy Europe; and the last and best of kings, and our most shining lights, will follow
into the same bottomless abyss, which has already swallowed up (and his voice faltered)--my liver.'

'Lights and liver!' said Mr. Schnackenberger; 'I suppose you mean liver and lights; but, lord!
Mr. Recorder, what a bilious view you take of the case! Your liver weighs too much in this
matter; and where that happens, a man's judgment is sure to be jaundiced.'

However, the council thought otherwise: Mr. Deputy's speech had produced a deep impression;
and, upon his motion, they adjudged that, in twelve hours, Juno should be conducted to the
frontiers of the city lands, and there solemnly outlawed: after which it should be free to
all citizens of B---- to pursue her with fire and sword; and even before that period, if she
were met without a responsible guide. Mr. Schnackenberger pleaded earnestly for an extension
of the armistice; but then arose, for the second time, with Catonic severity of aspect, Mr.
Deputy Recorder; he urged so powerfully the necessity of uncompromising principle in these
dangerous times, insisted so cogently on the false humanity of misplaced lenity, and wound
up the whole by such a pathetic array of the crimes committed by Juno--of the sausages she
had robbed, the rabbits she had strangled, the porcelain she had fractured, the raspberry-vinegar
she had spilt, the mutton she had devoted to chops ('her own "chops," remember,' said Mr. Schnackenberger),
the Brussels' veil, and the Mechlin lace, which she had swallowed, the domestic harmony which
she had disturbed, the laws of the land which she had insulted and outraged, the peace of mind
which she had invaded, and, finally, (said he) 'as if all this were not enough, the liver--the
goose's liver--my liver--my unoffending liver'--('and lights,' said Mr. Schnackenberger) 'which
she has burglariously and inhumanly immolated to her brutal propensities:' on all this Mr.
Deputy executed such a bravura, and the sins of Juno chased each other so rapidly, and assumed
so scarlet a hue, that the council instantly negatived her master's proposition; the single
dissentient voice being that of Mr. Mayor, who, with tears in his eyes, conjured Mr. Schnackenberger
not to confound the innocent with the guilty.

CHAPTER XXIII.

IN WHICH MISFORTUNE EMPTIES HER LAST VIAL UPON THE HEAD OF MR. SCHNACKENBERGER.

Exhausted by the misfortunes of the day, towards evening Mr. Jeremiah was reposing at his length,
and smoking in the window-seat of his room. Solemn clouds of smoke expressed the gloomy vapours
which rested on his brain. The hours of Juno's life, it seemed to him, were numbered; every
soul in B----was her sworn foe--bipeds and quadrupeds, men, women, dogs, cats, children, kittens,
deputy-recorders, rabbits, cooks, legs-of-mutton, to say nothing of goose-livers, sausages,
haunches of venison, and 'quilts.'--If he were to take country-lodgings for her, and to send
her out of B----, what awaited her there? Whither could she go, but some butcher--some butterwoman--some
rough-rider or other had a private account to settle with her?--'Unhappy creature!' ejaculated
the student, 'torment of my life!'

At this moment Mr. Schnackenberger's anxious ruminations were further enforced by the appearance
of the town-crier under his window: inert as the town-council were in giving effect to their
own resolutions, on this occasion it was clear that they viewed the matter as no joke; and
were bent on rigorously following up their sentence. For the crier proclaimed the decree by
beat of drum; explained the provisos of the twelve hours' truce, and enjoined all good citizens,
and worthy patriots, at the expiration of that period, to put the public enemy to the sword,
wherever she should be found, and even to rise en masse, if that should be necessary, for the
extermination of the national robber--as they valued their own private welfare, or the honour
and dignity of the state.

'English fiend!' said Mr. Schnackenberger, 'will nothing reclaim thee? Now that I am rid of
my German plague, must I be martyred by my English plague?' For be it mentioned that, on our
hero's return from the council, he had received some little comfort in his afflictions from
hearing that Mrs. Sweetbread had, upon her return to B----, testified her satisfaction with
the zealous leader of the butchers' boys, by forthwith bestowing upon him her widowed hand
and heart, together with the Sow and its appurtenances. 'English fiend!' resumed Mr. Schnackenberger,
'most edacious and audacious of quadrupeds! can nothing be done for thee? Is it impossible
to save thy life?' And again he stopped to ruminate. For her metaphysics it was hopeless to
cure; but could nothing be done for her physics? At the university of X---- she had lived two
years next door neighbour to the Professor of Moral Philosophy, and had besides attended many
of his lectures without any sort of benefit to her morals, which still continued of the very
worst description. 'But could no course of medical treatment,' thought her master, 'correct
her inextinguishable voracity? Could not her pulse be lowered? Might not her appetite, or her
courage, be tamed? Would a course of tonics be of service to her? Suppose I were to take her
to England to try the effect of her native air; would any of the great English surgeons or
physicians be able to prescribe for her effectually? Would opium cure her? Yet there was a
case of bulimy at Toulouse, where the French surgeons caught the patient and saturated him
with opium; but it was of no use; for he ate[26] as many children after it as before. Would
Mr. Abernethy, with his blue pill and his Rufus pill, be of any service to her? Or the acid
bath--or the sulphate of zinc--or the white oxide of bismuth?--or soda-water? For, perhaps,
her liver may be affected. But, lord! what talk I of her liver? Her liver's as sound as mine.
It's her disposition that's in fault; it's her moral principles that are relaxed; and something
must be done to brace them. Let me consider.'

[26] This man, whose case I have read in some French Medical Memoirs, was a desperate fellow:
he cared no more for an ounce of opium, than for a stone of beef, or half a bushel of potatoes:
all three would not have made him a breakfast. As to children, he denied in the most tranquil
manner that he ate them. ''Pon my honour,' he sometimes said, 'between ourselves, I never do
eat children.' However, it was generally agreed, that he was pædophagous, or infantivorous.
Some said that he first drowned them; whence I sometimes called him the pædobaptist. Certain
it is, that wherever he appeared, a sudden scarcity of children prevailed.--Note of the Translator.

At this moment a cry of 'murder, murder!' drew the student's eyes to the street below him;
and there, to afflict his heart, stood his graceless Juno, having just upset the servant of
a cook's shop, in the very act of rifling her basket; the sound of the drum was yet ringing
through the streets; the crowd collected to hear it had not yet withdrawn from the spot; and
in this way was Juno expressing her reverence for the proclamation of the town-council of B----.

'Fiend of perdition!' said Mr. Schnackenberger, flinging his darling pipe at her head, in the
anguish of his wrath, and hastening down to seize her. On arriving below, however, there lay
his beautiful sea-foam pipe in fragments upon the stones; but Juno had vanished--to reappear
no more in B----.

CHAPTER XXIV.

AND SET YOU DOWN THAT IN ALEPPO ONCE--OTHELLO.

The first thing Mr. Schnackenberger did was to draw his purse-strings, and indemnify the cook-maid.
The next thing Mr. Schnackenberger did was to go into the public-room of the Gun, call for
a common pipe, and seat himself growling in a corner.--Of all possible privileges conferred
by the laws, the very least desirable is that of being created game: Juno was now invested
with that 'painful pre-eminence;' she was solemnly proclaimed game: and all qualified persons,
i. e. every man, woman, and child, were legally authorised to sink--burn--or destroy her. 'Now
then,' said Mr. Schnackenberger to himself, 'if such an event should happen--if any kind soul
should blow out the frail light of Juno's life, in what way am I to answer the matter to her
purchaser, Mr. Fabian Sebastian?' Such were the thoughts which fumed away from the anxious
mind of Mr. Schnackenberger in surging volumes of smoke.

Together with the usual evening visitors of the public-rooms at the Gun, were present also
Mr. Von Pilsen, and his party. Above paths are just imperceptible variables grooves
of torrents and landslides in the winter, which follows the hunter in his bold excursions.
Finally, if you want to go over the back shiny and slippery refrigerators, exposing life on a
whim a tourist, you will need to jump over cracks deep glass and carefully climb stairs that will
guide your practice on ice to peak ú ax blows. What transitions and physical and social varieties
between the region's railways and refrigerators, - between the engineer and the hunter wild!
All the gap between a highly advanced civilization and the complete absence of life! ...

* * * * *

       

The Swiss Confederation or Switzerland is a nation formed by the agglomeration of many races
or derivations of races formed on States or entities, enjoying sovereignty own, have been combining
in complex nationality without losing their traditions in any way and personality and social policy.
This clearly contrasts with the origin of all European nations, whose unit has resulted from
a series of conquests or absorption. Hence Swiss-type specialty, where everything has the hallmark
of local life or independence and the variety within the federative unit. Without attempting to
summarize the complicated history of that country, which has been influenced by many or too different
invasions and dominations (Roman, Italian, Saracens, French, German and even British Savoyard),
will indicate Quickly general episodes of the first order, reserving the more curious details
for the page that corresponds to each canton in particular.

The first time as far as the story with some precision about the people The Romans called Helvetii
or Helvetica, offers just a swarm of barbarian tribes rough and tough character physical constitution,
scattered in the mountains and plains from setentrional shore of Lake Geneva to the left bank
of the Middle Rhine, and from Alpine heights of Graubünden or Rhetianos to the foothills of
Jura side slopes Franco-South County.
 Come, dear
friend, embrace me: let us have a fraternal hug.'

'Basta!' cried Mr. Jeremiah, attaching his shoulder, and squeezing him, with a right hand of
'high pressure,' down into his chair--'This is a very good story, Mr. Von Pilsen, that you
have told us: and pity it were that so good a story should want a proper termination. In future,
therefore, my Pilsen,

    When you shall these unhappy deeds relate,

be sure you do not forget the little sequel which I shall furnish: tell it to the end, my Pilsen:

    And set you down that in Aleppo once--'

Here the whole company began to quake with the laughter of anticipation--

    'And set you down that in Aleppo once--

when a fribble--a coxcomb--a puppy dared to traduce a student from the university of X----

    I took the circumcised dog by the nose, And smote him thus----'

at the same time breaking his pipe calmly on the very prominent nose of Mr. Von Pilsen.

Inextinguishable laughter followed from all present: Mr. Von Pilsen quitted the room forthwith:
and next morning was sought for in vain in B----.

CHAPTER XXV.

WHICH CONTAINS A DUEL--AND A DEATH.

Scarcely had Mr. Schnackenberger withdrawn to his apartment, when a pair of 'field-pieces'
were heard clattering up-stairs--such and so mighty as, among all people that on earth do dwell,
no mortal wore, himself only except, and the student, Mr. Fabian Sebastian. Little had he thought
under his evening canopy of smoke, that Nemesis was treading so closely upon his heels.

'Sir, my brother,' began Mr. Student Fabian, 'the time is up: and here am I, to claim my rights.
Where is the dog? The money is ready: deliver the article: and payment shall be made.'

Mr. Schnackenberger shrugged his shoulders.

'Nay, my brother, no jesting (if you please) on such serious occasions: I demand my article.'

'What, if the article have vanished?'

'Vanished!' said Mr. Fabian; 'why then we must fight, until it comes back again.--Sir, my brother,
you have acted nefariously enough in absconding with goods that you had sold: would you proceed
to yet greater depths in nefariousness, by now withholding from me my own article?'

So saying, Mr. Fabian paid down the purchase money in hard gold upon the table. 'Come, now,
be easy,' said Mr. Schnackenberger, 'and hear me.'

'Be easy, do you say? That will I not: but hear I will, and with all my heart, provided it
be nothing unhearable--nor anything in question of my right to the article: else, you know,
come knocks.' 'Knocks!' said Jeremiah: 'and since when, I should be glad to know, has the Schnackenberger
been in the habit of taking knocks without knocking again, and paying a pretty large per centage?'

'Ah! very likely. That's your concern. As to me, I speak only for myself and for my article.'
Hereupon Mr. Schnackenberger made him acquainted with the circumstances, which were so unpalatable
to the purchaser of 'the article,' that he challenged Mr. Schnackenberger to single combat
there and then.

'Come,' said Mr. Fabian; 'but first put up the purchase money: for I, at least, will practise
nothing that is nefarious.'

Mr. Schnackenberger did so; redeemed his sword from Mrs. Sweetbread by settling her bill; buckled
it on; and attended Mr. Fabian to the neighbouring forest.

Being arrived at a spot suitable to their purpose, and their swords drawn, Mr. Schnackenberger
said--'Upon my word it's a shocking thing that we must fight upon this argument: not but it's
just what I have long expected. Junonian quarrels I have had, in my time, 747; and a Junonian
duel is nothing more than I have foreseen for this last week. Yet, after all, brother, I give
you my honour that the brute is not worth a duel: for, fools as we have been in our rivalship
about her, between ourselves she is a mere agent of the fiend, and minister of perdition, to
him who is so unhappy as to call her his.'

'Like enough, my brother; haven't a doubt you're in the right, for you know her best: still
it would be nefarious in a high degree if our blades were to part without crossing each other.
We must tilt a bit: Sir, my brother, we must tilt. So lunge away at me; and never fear but
I'll lunge as fast as you.'

So said--so done: but scarce had Mr. Sebastian pushed his first 'carte over the arm,' which
was well parried by his antagonist, when, with a loud outcry, in rushed Juno; and, without
troubling herself about the drawn swords, she drove right at the pit of Mr. Sebastian's stomach,
knocked the breath out of his body, the sword out of his hand, and himself upon his back.

'Ah! my goddess, my Juno!' cried Mr. Schnackenberger; 'Nec vox hominem sonat, oh Dea certe!'

'Nec vox hominem sonat?' said Mr. Fabian, rising: 'Faith, you're right there; for I never heard
a voice more like a brute's in my life.'

'Down then, down, Juno,' said Mr. Schnackenberger, as Juno was preparing for a second campaign
against Mr. Fabian's stomach: Mr. Fabian, on his part, held out his hand to his brother student--saying,
'all quarrels are now ended.' Mr. Jeremiah accepted his hand cordially. Mr. Fabian offered
to resign 'the article,' however agitating to his feelings. Mr. Jeremiah, though no less agitated,
protested he should not. 'I will, by all that's magnanimous,' said Mr. Fabian. 'By the memory
of Curtius, or whatever else is most sacred in self-sacrifice, you shall not,' said Mr. Jeremiah.
'Hear me, thou light of day,' said Mr. Fabian kneeling. 'Hear me,' interrupted Mr. Jeremiah,
kneeling also: yes, the Schnackenberger knelt, but carefully and by circumstantial degree;
for he was big and heavy as a rhinoceros, and afraid of capsizing, and perspired freely. Mr.
Fabian kneeled like a dactyle: Mr. Jeremiah kneeled like a spondee, or rather like a molossus.
Juno, meantime, whose feelings were less affected, did not kneel at all; but, like a tribrach,
amused herself with chasing a hare which just then crossed one of the forest ridings. A moment
after was heard the report of a fowling-piece. Bitter presentiment of the truth caused the
kneeling duelists to turn their heads at the same instant. Alas! the subject of their high-wrought
contest was no more: English Juno lay stretched in her blood! Up started the 'dactyle;' up
started the 'spondee;' out flew their swords; curses, dactylic and spondaic, began to roll;
and the gemini of the university of X, side by side, strode after the Junonicide, who proved
to be a forester. Haven heard it calmly, not looking surprised. Then he made with his mouth about very
special pampering. His answer was not long.

"I'll tell you ... I have money, but do not know if I have it.

Tomorrow will bring me some very fat accounts ...».

The eyes gazed fixedly impertinent.

Rosalie wished that looked not so much and soon give him the money.

After a pause that seemed to make studies Refuge calculation on the brow of the Bringas, I say:

"What
is money ... I have it, you see. "

Cajoncillo seemed stirred a sewing kit, and background he brought a bunch of things. Were rags, thread
limp and banknotes, all forming a mass.

"See you ... I do not lack. But ...».

Rosalia is ignited spirits when he saw the bills. But he was filled with darkness when the girl
ordered Sanchez to put money back into the deep, and moving head, said:

"Ah, I can not, ma'am, I can not ...».

The Pipaón thought thus: "He wants this rascal, is that I humble myself
more, I beg you and I begged and make a pot in front of her ... I
want to drag their feet trample ... Ah, cochinísima, if I was not
like I am, you know what you would do?

Well, wake up the skirt and take a broom stick and fill of cardinals that promontory of meat
have ... Vast crazy, what greater honor you want to pay money to
someone like me.

"

Naturally, none of this I thought the lady was told. On the contrary, had to resort honeyed expressions
and appropriate to the criticality of the case.

"Think about it, child. Maybe you can ... What you have to pay may be deferred for a few days
while mine ...».

- I only wish I - "the other with affected pity
-. I feel pretty go you empty handed ...

The highly protective effect
of this sentence Rosalia humbled more than I was. Would have taken
by those so abundant hair, to rub the snout on the ground.

"Could
not make an effort ...?»-- said, pulling out the intimate value of
your chest.

- What else would I! ... I'm sad you can not help you.
Create sorry heartily. In some instances, I am convinced that the compilers (Germans living in Germany)
had a downright hoax put upon them by some facetious Briton whom they had consulted; what is
given as the English equivalent for the German word being not seldom a pure coinage that never
had any existence out of Germany. Other instances there are, in which the words, though not
of foreign manufacture, are almost as useless to the English student as if they were; slang-words,
I mean, from the slang vocabulary, current about the latter end of the seventeenth century.
These must have been laboriously culled from the works of Tom Brown, Sir Roger L'Estrange,
Echard, Jeremy Collier, and others, from 1660 to 1700, who were the great masters of this vernacular
English (as it might emphatically be called, with a reference to the primary[27] meaning of
the word vernacular): and I verily believe, that, if any part of this slang has become, or
ever should become a dead language to the English critic, his best guide to the recovery of
its true meaning will be the German dictionaries of Bailey, Arnold, &c. in their earliest editions.
By one of these, the word Potztausend (a common German oath) is translated, to the best of
my remembrance, thus:--'Udzooks, Udswiggers, Udswoggers, Bublikins, Boblikins, Splitterkins,'
&c. and so on, with a large choice of other elegant varieties. Here, I take it, our friend
the hoaxer had been at work: but the drollest example I have met with of their slang is in
the following story told to me by Mr. Coleridge. About the year 1794, a German, recently imported
into Bristol, had happened to hear of Mrs. X., a wealthy widow. He thought it would be a good
speculation to offer himself to the lady's notice as well qualified to 'succeed' to the late
Mr. X.; and accordingly waited on the lady with that intention. Having no great familiarity
with English, he provided himself with a copy of one of the dictionaries I have mentioned;
and, on being announced to the lady, he determined to open his proposal with this introductory
sentence--Madam, having heard that Mr. X., late your husband, is dead: but coming to the last
word 'gestorben' (dead), he was at a loss for the English equivalent; so, hastily pulling out
his dictionary (a huge 8vo.), he turned to the word 'sterben,' (to die),--and there found----;
but what he found will be best collected from the dialogue which followed, as reported by the
lady:--

German. Madam, hahfing heard that Mein Herr X., late your man, is----(these words he kept chiming
over as if to himself, until he arrived at No. 1 of the interpretations of 'sterben,'--when
he roared out, in high glee at his discovery)----is, dat is--has, kicked de bucket.

Widow. (With astonishment.)--'Kicked the bucket,' Sir!--what--

German. Ah! mein Gott!--Alway Ich make mistake: I vou'd have said--(beginning again with the
same solemnity of tone)--since dat Mein Herr X., late your man, hav--hopped de twig--(which
words he screamed out with delight, certain that he had now hit the nail upon the head).

Widow. Upon my word, Sir, I am at a loss to understand you: 'Kicked the bucket,' and 'hopped
the twig----!'

German. (Perspiring with panic.) Ah, Madam! von--two--tree--ten tousand pardon: vat sad, wicket
dictionary I haaf, dat alway bring me in trouble: but now you shall hear--(and then, recomposing
himself solemnly for a third effort, he began as before)--Madam, since I did hear, or wash
hearing, dat Mein Herr X., late your man, haaf--(with a triumphant shout) haaf, I say, gone
to Davy's locker----

[27] What I mean is this. Vernacular (from verna, a slave born in his master's house). 1. The
homely idiomatic language in opposition to any mixed jargon, or lingua franca, spoken by an
imported slave:--2. Hence, generally, the pure mother-tongue as opposed to the same tongue
corrupted by false refinement. By vernacular English, therefore, in the primary sense, and
I mean, such homely English as is banished from books and polite conversation to Billingsgate
and Wapping.

Further he would have gone; but the widow could stand no more: this nautical phrase, familiar
to the streets of Bristol, allowed her no longer to misunderstand his meaning; and she quitted
the room in a tumult of laughter, sending a servant to show her unfortunate suitor out of the
house, with his false friend the dictionary; whose help he might, perhaps, invoke for the last
time, on making his exit, in the curses--'Udswoggers, Boblikins, Bublikins, Splitterkins!'

N.B. As test words for trying a modern German dictionary, I will advise the student to look
for the words--Beschwichtigen Kulisse, and Mansarde. The last is originally French, but the
first is a true German word; and, on a question arising about its etymology, at the house of
a gentleman in Edinburgh, could not be found in any one, out of five or six modern Anglo-German
dictionaries.

                                   THE END.

                         RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,

                               LONDON & BUNGAY.

