MASTERS OF THE GUILD

By

L. LAMPREY Author of "In the Days of the Guild"

Illustrated by Florence Choate and Elizabeth Curtis

New York

1920

CONTENTS

To Dorothy

I

PEIROL OF THE PIGEONS

Bellerophon

II

A TOURNAMENT IN THE CLOUDS

The Jesters

III

THE PUPPET PLAYERS

The Abbot's Lesson

IV

PADRAIG OF THE SCRIPTORIUM

Cap O' Rushes

V

THE TAPESTRY CHAMBER

The Castle

VI

THE FAIRIES' WELL

Lullaby of the Pict Mother

VII

THE WOLVES OF OSSORY

St. Hugh and the Birds

VIII

THE ROAD OF THE WILD SWAN

The Lances

IX

THE SWORD OF DAMASCUS

Awakening

X

FOOL'S GOLD

To Josian from Prison

XI

ARCHIATER'S DAUGHTER

New Altars

XII

COLD HARBOR

Galley Song

XIII

THE WISDOM OF THE GALLEYS

Harbor Song

XIV

SOLOMON'S SEAL

The Leprechaun

XV

BLACK MAGIC IN THE TEMPLE

The Ebbing Tide

XVI

THE END OF A PILGRIMAGE

The Crusaders

NOTES

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"The boy gave a low call and a soft rush of wings was heard" Frontispiece

"'You have your choice--to remain here quietly, alive, or to remain permanently, dead'"

"'How now, Master Stephen! What foolery is this?'"

"It was the first time Padraig had seen anyone write"

"'Every inch of this linen will be covered with embroidery'" (in colors)

"''Tis the brat of a scatter-brained woman'"

"Directly in front sounded the unmistakable snarl of a wolf"

"An immense boar stumbled out and charged at Eleanor's horse"

"'Belike he got it where he's been--in the Holy Land'" (in colors)

"'I know all about your search for treasure'"

"'He called me his mouse and if I kept still I had cheese for my dinner'"

"Nothing would do but that they all should go immediately to see what had come to light"

"Andrea was at work upon the carving of the doorway"

"A siffle of indrawn breath was heard in the crowd as he carried it to the fire" (in colors)

"There was shouting and laughter in the courtyard"

DEDICATION

TO DOROTHY

 O little girl who used to be,
 Come down the Old World road with me,
 And watch the galleons leaping home
 Deep-laden, through the rainbow foam,
 And the far-glimmering lances reel
 Where clashes battle-axe on steel,
 When the long shouts of triumph ring
 Around the banner of the King!

     To elfin harps those minstrels rime
     Who live in Once-upon-a-Time!

 In that far land of Used-to-Be,
 Strange folk were known to you and me,--
 Mowgh and Puck, and all their kin,
 Launcelot, and Huckleberry Finn,
 Wise Talleyrand, brave Ivanhoe,
 Juliet, and Lear, and Prospero,
 Alleyne and his White Company,
 And trooping folk of Faerie!

     People of every race and clime
     Are found in Once-upon-a-Time!

 And in those days that used to be
 The gypsy wind that raced the sea
 Came singing of enchanted lands,
 Of sapphire waves on golden sands,
 Of wind-borne fleets that race the swallow,
 Of Squirrel-fairy in her hollow,
 Of brooklets full of scattered stars,
 And odorous herbs by pasture-bars

     Where to the cow-bells' tinkling chime
     Come dreams of Once-upon-a-Time!

 O little girl who used to be,
 The days are long in Faerie,--
 Their garnered sunshine's wealth of gold
 No royal treasure-vault may hold.
 And now, as if our earth possessed
 Alchemy's fabled Alkahest,
 Our harbors blaze with jewelled light,
 Our air-ships wing their circling flight,

     And we ourselves are in the rime
     That sings of Once-upon-a-Time!

I

PEIROL OF THE PIGEONS

It was a great day in Count Thibaut's castle. Every one knew that, down to the newest smallest
scullery-maid. The Count had come home from England with Lady Philippa, his daughter, and there
would be feasting and song and laughter for days and days and days.

Ranulph the troubadour, who had arrived in their company, was glad of a quiet hour in the garden
before supper was served. He knew that he would have to sing that evening, and he wished to
go over the melodies he had in mind, for he might on the spur of the moment compose new words
to them. In fact a song in honor of his hostess was already in his thoughts. The very birds
of the air seemed to welcome her. The warm southern winds were full of their warbling--beccafico,
loriot, merle, citronelle, woodlark, nightingale,--every tree, copse and tuft of grass held
a tiny minstrel. When the great gate opened to a fanfare of trumpets, from the castle walls
there came the murmur of innumerable doves. A castle had its dove-cote as it had its poultry-yard
or rabbit-warren, but the birds were not always so fearless or so many.

The song was nearly finished when the singer became aware that some one else was in the garden.
A small boy, with serious dark eyes and a white pigeon in his arms, stood close by. Ranulph
smiled a persuasive smile which few children could resist.

"And who are you, my lad?"

"Peirol, the gooseherd's boy," the youngster replied composedly. "You're none of the family,
are you?"

"Only a jongleur. You have a great many pigeons here."

"That's why I came in when I heard you playing. Does she--Lady Philippa-- like pigeons?"

"I think she does. In fact I know she does. Why?"

"Grandfather said she would not care how many pigeons were killed to make pies. Nobody really
loves them much, but me. They're fond of me too." Pigeons flew from tree-top, tower, parapet
and gable, alighting on his head and arms until he looked like a little pigeon-tree in full bloom.

"Some of them are voyageurs," he said, strewing salted pease for the strutting, cooing, softly
crowding birds. "I'm training them every day. Some day I shall know more about pigeons than
any one else in the world."

Ranulph had some ado not to smile; the speaker was so small and the tone so assured. "Perhaps
you will," he said. "Are they as tame with others as they are with you?" "Some others," answered
Peirol gravely. "People who are patient and know how to keep still. They like you."

A slaty-blue pigeon was already pecking at Ranulph's pointed scarlet shoe for a grain lodged
there. The troubadour bent down, held out his hand, and the bird walked into it. He had played
with birds often enough in his vagabond early years to know their feelings. But now a wave
of merry voices broke upon the garden paths.

"Peirol," he said, "I will see you again. I have a little plan for you and the pigeons which
will, I think, give pleasure to Lady Philippa."

One of the entertainments arranged to take place was a feast out of doors, in a woodland glade
especially suited to it. Ranulph's inspiration had to do with this.

Among the guests the only stranger was Sir Gualtier (or Walter) Giffard, younger son of a Norman
family. One of his ancestors had gone to England with Duke William a hundred years before,
but the family had not been on good terms with later kings and its fortunes had somewhat fallen.
Every one, however, spoke with respect of this knight and his elder brother, Sir Stephen, and
they had been of service to Count Thibaut during his stay in England. This Giffard had never
been so far south before, and he seemed to feel that he had got into some sort of enchanted
realm. He was more soldier than courtier, but his eyes said a great deal. The luxurious abundance
of a Provencal castle, the smooth ease of the serving, the wit and gaiety of the people, all
were new to him. He had attended state banquets, but they were as unlike the entertainment
here provided as was the stern simplicity of his boyhood home in Normandy, or the rough-and-
tumble camp life of recent years.

The out-of-door dinner was not a hap-hazard picnic, but neither was it in the least stiff or
formal. The servants went by a short cut across the meadow to prepare the tables, while knights
and ladies followed the more leisurely path along the river bank. It was a walk through fairyland.
The very waters were in a holiday mood. The current strayed from one side to the other, leaving
clear still pools and enticing little backwaters, and singing past the elfin islets and huge
overshadowing trees, like a gleeful spirit.

Lady Philippa had never looked more lovely. As the party was not to be seen on a public road,
veils and wimples were discarded, and her bright brown hair, braided in two long braids, was
crowned only by a circlet of gold set with pearls and emeralds. The trailing robes worn at
formal dinners would also be out of place, and she wore a bliaut or outer robe of her favorite
rose-colored silk, a wide border of gold embroidery giving it weight enough to make it hang
in graceful lines. The sleeves were loose and long, the ends almost touching the hem of the
gown. Under this was a violet silk robe of heavier material with bands of ermine at the neck
and on the small close sleeves. Under this again the embroidered edges of a fine white linen
robe could be seen at throat and wrists. The girdle was of braided violet silk, the ends weighted
with amethyst and emerald ornaments. A white mantle of silk and wool, trimmed with fur of the
black squirrel, and fastened under the chin with a gold button, and an embroidered alms-purse,
completed the costume. The other ladies of the party were attired as carefully, and the dress
of the men was as rich and brilliant as that of the women. They passed through the wavering
light and shadow of the woodlands like a covey of bright-plumaged birds.

In the level open space where the feast was spread the servants had placed trestles, over which
long boards were fitted. Benches covered with silken cushions served as seats. The cloth was
of linen dyed scarlet in the rare Montpellier dye, and over it was spread another of white
linen, embroidered in open-work squares. At each end of the table was a large silver dish,
one containing a meat-pie, the other a pie made of the meat of various fowls with savory seasoning.
On silver plates were slices of cold chicken and meat. Glass trays contained salad, lettuces,
radishes and olives. The salt, pepper and spices were in silver and gold dishes of fanciful
shapes. Here and there were crystal vases of freshly gathered roses and violets. On the corners
of the table were trenchers of white bread--wastel, cocket, manchet, of fine wheaten flour,--and
brown bread of barley, millet and rye. For dessert there were the spicy apples of Auvergne,
Spanish oranges, raisins, figs, little sweet cakes, wine white and red, and nuts in a great
carved brass dish of the finest Saracen work, with carved wood nut-crackers. Ewers and basins
of decorated brass, for washing the hands after the meal, were ready. Eastern carpets and cushions,
placed upon a bank under the trees, would afford a place where the company, after dining, might
linger for hours, enjoying the gay give- and-take of conversation, the songs of artists who
knew their art, and the constant musical undertone of winds, birds and waters. The surprise
which Ranulph had planned was designed for the moment when the guests began to dally with nuts
and wine, reluctant to leave the table. Some one called upon the troubadour to sing. He had
counted upon this. Rising, he bowed to the Count and his daughter, and began:

 "In the month of Arcady
 Green the summer meadows be,--
 When the dawn with fingers light
 Lifts the curtains of the night,
 And from tented crimson skies
 Glorious doth the sun arise,--
   Who are these who give him greeting,
   On swift wings approaching, fleeting,--
 Who but birds whose carols bring
 Homage to their gracious King!
 "Lo! the Queen of Arcady
 From the land of Faery
 Gladdens our adoring eyes,
 Fair and gentle, sweet and wise,
 Her companions here on earth
 Love and Loyalty and Mirth!
   Who, the joyous tidings hearing,
   Fly to greet her, now appearing?
 Aphrodite's pigeons fleet,--
 See, they gather at her feet."

No one had heard a low clear call from the boughs of the tree overhead, or seen the figure
of a small boy in a fantastic tunic of goatskins, slipping down the tree-trunk near Ranulph.
As the company rose from the table the troubadour moved away a little, still thrumming his
refrain, and in that moment there was a whir of sudden wings and the air was dark with pigeons.
As the birds alighted Lady Philippa was surrounded by the pretty creatures, and in a graceful
little speech Ranulph presented to her Peirol as a Faun, the Master of the Pigeons, who had
brought them to do homage to their sovereign lady.

It was just the sort of informal pageant to delight the heart of Provence. No more dainty and
captivating interlude had been seen at a festival.

There was a great deal of wonderment about the way in which the scene had been arranged, but
it was really quite simple. According to the usual fashion the guests were seated on only one
side of the table, the other side being left free for the servants to present the various dishes.
The company faced the river, and the trees that canopied the table were behind them. Nothing,
therefore, hindered Peirol from luring his pigeons to a point within hearing of his voice,
and concealing himself in the thick leafage until Ranulph gave the signal for them to be brought
upon the stage. Most of the afternoon was spent in watching and discussing Peirol and the pigeons.

"A pigeon has certain advantages," observed Gualtier Giffard, as he and the troubadour, sitting
a little way from the others, watched the carriers rise and circle in the air. "He need only
rise high enough to see his goal,--and fly there." "Pity but a man might do the same," said
Ranulph lightly. The eyes of the two young men met for an instant in unspoken understanding.
Under some conditions they might have felt themselves rivals. But neither the penniless younger
son of a Norman house, nor a landless troubadour of Avignon, had much hope of meeting Count
Thibaut's views for his only daughter.

"It would be rather absurd," Ranulph went on, stroking the feathers of the little dun pigeon
Rien-du-Tout, "for a bird to outdo a man. Perhaps some day we shall even sail the air as now
we sail the seas. Picture to yourself a winged galleon with yourself at the helm--about to
discover a world beyond the sunset. It is all in having faith, I tell you. Unbelief is the
dragon of the ancient fables."

The Norman smiled rather sadly. "Meanwhile," he said, "having no flying ships and no new crusades
to prove our mettle, we spend ourselves on such errands as we have, or beat the air vainly--like
the pigeons. Were it not that a man owes loyalty to his house and to his King I would enlist
under the piebald banner of the Templars. But my brother and I have set ourselves to win back
the place that our fathers lost, and until that is done I have no errand with dragons."

Ranulph nodded, thoughtfully. "The King would be glad of more such service," he said. "Good
fortune be with you!"

 BELLEROPHON

 Hail, Poet--and farewell! Our day is past,
   Yet may we hear new songs before we die,
 The chanteys of the mightiest and the last,--
   The squadrons of the sky.

 We knew the rhythm of myriad marching feet,
   Gray tossing seas that rocked the wind-whipped sail,
 The drumming hoofs of horses, and the beat
   Of stern hearts clad in mail.

 But you--earth-fettered we shall watch your wings
   Topping the mountains, battling winds,--to dare
 Challenge the lammergeyer where she swings
   Down the long lanes of air.

 And when you take the skylark for your guide,
   And soar straight up to sun-drenched shores of Time,
 Immortal singers there shall, eager-eyed,
   Await your new-born rhyme.

 Their songs are charm-songs, a divine caress,
   Or torrents that no power of man could tame,
 Or time-hushed gardens of grave loveliness,
   But yours,--a leaping flame!

 Hail, Poet! Yours the Dream Interpreted,
   Earth's haunting fairy-tale since life began,--
 The Dragon of Unfaith, his magic dead,
   Slain by the Flying Man!

II

A TOURNAMENT IN THE CLOUDS

Alazais de Montfaucon was to be married, and had chosen her dearest friend Philippa to be maid
of honor. None of her friends except Philippa had seen the bridegroom; he was an English knight,
Hugh l'Estrange. He had lands on the Welsh marches, and the charming Alazais was to be carried
off by him, to live among savages. This, at least, was the impression of Beatriz d'Acunha and
Catalina d'Anduze, who were also to be bridesmaids. Philippa, having lived in England, looked
at the matter less dolefully. Still, when all was said, it was an immense change for Alazais,
and she herself declared that if any one but Hugh had proposed it she would not think of such
a thing.

"We must provide you with a flock of these voyageur pigeons," said Savaric de Marsan. "Then,
when you are shut up in your stronghold with the Welsh on one side and Saxon outlaws on the
other, you can appeal to your friends for help."

Alazais laughed her pretty rippling laugh.

"The fortress is not yet built," she said with a toss of her golden head. "We are not going
to live among the heathen."

"You men!" pouted Beatriz. "You are always thinking of battles and sieges, wars and jousting.
Perhaps you would like a tournament of pigeons!"

"Why not?" queried Savaric undisturbed. "It would be highly amusing."

"I lay my wager on Blanchette here," said Peire d'Acunha. "She is as graceful as a lady. She
shows her breeding."

"Endurance, my friend, is what counts in a carrier," said Bertrand d'Aiguerra. "Pere Azuli
yonder will forget the miles behind him--as you forget your debts."

"You are both wrong," said Savaric. "It is spirit that wins. Little Sieur Rien-du-Tout, the
pigeon without a pedigree, will make fools of all of you."

The pigeon-tournament was actually planned, with much laughter and light- hearted nonsense.
It was to take place at Montfaucon during the week of the wedding. Each knight should adorn
his bird with his lady's colors, and the little feathered messengers were to carry love-letters
written in verse. Afterward, the pigeons were all to be presented to Lady Alazais for her dovecote
in the barbarous land to which she was exiled.

Pigeons were very much the fashion for a time. Dainty demoiselles preened and paced on the
short sweet turf, petting and feeding the birds, and looking rather like pigeons themselves.
But no one became really intimate with the carriers except Ranulph the troubadour, Lady Philippa,
and Sir Gualtier Giffard, who loved them for her sake.

The guests at the castle were all going to the wedding except Ranulph and the Norman knight.
Ranulph expected to accompany King Henry to England, and Gualtier Giffard had to take a report
from Count Thibaut to friends in Normandy, touching certain matters of state.

Then the Count was invited to a hastily arranged banquet in a town some leagues away, where
various important persons were to be guests, among them Henry Plantagenet himself. The way
to Montfaucon lying in the same direction, it was decided that Alazais and her bridesmaids
should return to her home under escort of the Count and his friends. When the banquet was over
and the conference between Henry and his vassals in Guienne was concluded, the wedding guests
would assemble at Montfaucon.

Gossip about the banquet and the conference flew like tennis-balls among the guests. It was
said that one of the matters discussed would be the claim of the deposed King of Leinster,
Dermot MacMurragh, who was even now at the heels of the English King, trying to interest him
in a possible Norman invasion of Ireland.

"I have seen this Dermot," said de Marsan, "and a choice group of cut- throats he had collected
about him. Garin de Biterres was one of them, by the way."

"He was always over-fond of laying wagers," yawned d'Acunha. "He is probably betting his head
on this Irish wild-goose chase."

"I will burn a candle," said Bertrand d'Aiguerra, "to any god of luck who will send that caitiff
where he gets himself killed. If he were not one of us he would not be such a nuisance. His
mercenaries will be the ruin of us. The people were touchy enough before, but now they begin
to think we are all birds of the same black feather."

"He is only half Auvergnais," objected Savaric. "The other half is Sicilian, I believe. A man
cannot be half a gentleman, can he? I will admit that Biterres desires to live like a gentleman,--according
to his own ideas of one. He has not been the same man since he was taken by the Moors. He was
never honest, but that seemed to warp his nature as well as his body. He learned things that
it does no man any good to know."

"Let us hope that Saint Patrick will dispose of him for the good of his Irish," remarked Enrique
de Montfaucon. "They say that the Plantagenet will do no more than give letters patent to any
Norman adventurer who takes up Dermot's cause. I think he has his hands full with his own sons."

Ranulph listened to this conversation with interest. The ill-famed leader of mercenaries had
aspired to the hand of Lady Philippa while she was yet a child--and had been brusquely dismissed
by her father. He lived now by hiring himself and his troops to any ruler who had a war on
hand and would pay his price. In peaceful intervals they lived as they could.

The Count was talking to Gualtier Giffard about the Irish venture.

"If the Normans rule Ireland," he observed, "your fortunes may improve. A grant of land there
might be worth your while."

The young knight met the Count's searching glance fearlessly. "I would not take it," he answered.
"Dermot lost his realm by his own fault. There is no honor in serving him."

"Ah," said the Count with a quizzical lift of the eyebrow, "in that case you are very right."

Ranulph often acted as an unofficial unrecognized envoy in state matters, and it did not surprise
him when he received a message from King Henry to the effect that he was to meet the monarch
at Montfaucon after the conference. Peirol, who knew every mile of the country, was to take
the pigeons thither for the tournament and be Ranulph's guide. It was altogether a very pleasant
prospect for perfect summer weather.

By brisk riding the troubadour and his little companion reached Montfaucon late in the afternoon
of the day following the departure of the Count's guests. The porter, a surly looking fellow,
hesitated about admitting them, and before opening the wicket gate consulted some one within.
The castle seemed to be in a somewhat disorderly state. Soldiers were playing dice by the gateway,
and horses were stamping and feeding in the outer bailey. Peirol was evidently taken for the
troubadour's servant, and an unkempt lad ushered them into a small room with a barred window,
in one of the older towers. Ranulph was not wont to think of his own dignity, but this lack
of courtesy did a little surprise him. Almost at once the youth poked his head in, without
knocking, to say that the lord of the castle would see him in the great hall.

More mystified than before, Ranulph obeyed the summons, for it amounted to that. In the master's
chair sat a man of about thirty, dark-skinned, with dense black hair and eyes, one leg somewhat
malformed, the knee being bowed and the foot turned slightly inward. He looked the troubadour
over with a sarcastic smile. Ranulph was still in riding-dress, and might have been mistaken
for a joglar or wandering minstrel, calling himself by the more dignified title of troubadour
or trouvere.

"I think," began the knight in a harsh drawl, "that one can often do no better than to tell
the truth, is it not so? I am the lord of this castle- -for the present. Of course I could
not refuse you admittance, or you might go off and spread inconvenient rumors. I must ask you
therefore to accept our hospitality unquestioning, like a courteous guest. We cannot allow
you to depart until we ourselves are gone. You have your choice--to remain here quietly, alive,
or to remain permanently, dead.

"Naturally you will not communicate with any ladies whom you may see, but if you can afford
them some entertainment you shall be paid. They have had but a dull time thus far, I fear,
and I would not have them think us barbarians, soldiers of fortune though we are. When I am
through with this castle I shall leave it as I found it, except for the temporary detention
of the inmates in various rooms, where I suppose they will stay until some one finds them.
If anybody is found dead it will be his own fault. Now, which horn of the dilemma is your choice--troubadour?"

During this extraordinary speech Ranulph had done some rapid thinking. From the man's appearance
he believed him to be Garin de Biterres. The castle had evidently been taken by surprise after
the Count's party had escorted the maidens thither and ridden away. Perhaps the marauders had
been lurking somewhere about awaiting the opportunity. They must know that they could not hold
it after the friends of the rightful lord knew what had been done, and their leader was too
cool-headed a man to have attempted so bold a raid without some important reason. The abduction
of four young girls, two of whom at least were heiresses, might seem such a reason to such
a man. Evidently he did not suspect Ranulph's character as a man of some reputation and the
confidential messenger of the King of England. This was a piece of luck. The chance of his
being useful to the captives was all the better.

With the elaborate meekness proper to his supposed low station he answered, "You leave me no
choice, my lord. To resist your will would be suicide, and that is a mortal sin."

The knight grinned like a sour-tempered dog. "Take care," he said, "that you change not your
very praise-worthy views. Have you any little diversion which may enliven a tedious hour at
supper-time?"

Ranulph's quick mind had been turning over plans. He thanked a hard Fate that his early experience
in camps, markets, inn-yards and fairs had been so thorough and so varied. In those days he
had been what Biterres now supposed him--one of those vagabond singers who sang popular songs
and often did tricks of jugglery, or danced, or gave acrobatic exhibitions, wherever they found
an audience. The panier in which the pigeons drowsed was probably taken for a collection of
costumes and properties.

The pigeons could not get through the barred window of his room. If they were let loose in
the courtyard and recognized as carriers, a bowman could easily bring them down. But now he
saw a way to elude suspicion.

"I have a trick," he ventured humbly, "which is most amusing, but it requires a large shell
or cofyn of pastry. When this pie is cut, live birds fly out. But perhaps it would not be convenient
to have your lordship's cook troubled with this?"

Biterres made an impatient gesture. "Child's play--but it will serve. The cook shall come for
your orders. Have it ready before the drinking begins or the men will not know whether you
have larks or peacocks in the pie."

Ranulph bowed very low and left the hall.

"Peirol," he said when he re-entered the cell-like room, "we are prisoners to a caitiff knight
who has taken this castle and undoubtedly holds your mistress and her friends also captive.
I think he intends to carry off the ladies, and I am not sure what will happen to the rest
of us. If we can get word to Count Thibaut's castle we may spoil the fellow's game. No one
must suspect, of course, that we have carriers with us. He takes us for strolling mountebanks
and desires us to amuse the company at supper. Now, I have a plan."

He was already writing the letters to be sent by the winged couriers, putting all his hard-won
skill with words into the task of getting all the information possible into a little space.
If the rescuing party did not come before Biterres took his prisoners away--and it was hardly
to be hoped that they could--at least they should have a fair start in pursuit of him and evidence
enough to punish him, if they received even one of these missives.

Peirol heard the scheme with wide-eyed gravity. At the end he nodded.

"That fellow asked what we had here," he said pointing to the panier, "and I told him when
the pie was cut he would see."

"Good!" laughed the troubadour. "That was a lucky answer, Peirol. And here comes the cook to
make the pie."

The cook, a stout beady-eyed little man, eyed the two somewhat sulkily, but went away grinning
over Ranulph's jokes and fingering Ranulph's generous fee. Furthermore he vouchsafed the information
that the leader of the mercenaries intended to leave the castle next day for the nearest seaport,
where he and his men would take a ship for Ireland. Lady Philippa was destined to be the bride
of Biterres himself; Alazais was to marry the second in command, Griffon de Malemort. The other
two demoiselles were to be taken to Ireland, where the King would doubtless find them husbands.
If they would not agree to this they were to be sold to a Moslem slave-dealer whose galley
was somewhere about. The servants and defenders of the castle had been herded into various
rooms and locked up. The cook himself did not mind a little recklessness on the part of military
adventurers such as these routiers, but he felt that this sort of thing was perilous. He intended
to give them the slip at the first opportunity, and they could cook their own soup if they liked.

The plot, infamous as it was, had unfortunately nothing impossible about it. Four unprotected
girls could be taken in guarded litters to the sea- coast and shipped to Ireland or to Cadiz,
Valencia, Alexandria or Morocco with no difficulty whatever unless some one got wind of the
fact. As for the Irish King, a man who had the sort of record he had, was not likely to quibble
over the means used by Biterres in getting himself a bride. And before the captives within
the castle could reach even the nearest of their friends and bring help, the whole troop would
have left the country.

Through the huge carved open-work screen at the end of the hall, after supper was served, Ranulph
had a view of the scene within. Biterres, with the fantastic formality it pleased him to use,
had insisted on the attendance of his prisoners at supper, and the meal was served with all
due ceremony. Biterres and Malemort appeared to be acting with studied politeness. The maidens
were behaving with the dignity and self-possession which became daughters of soldiers, although
they were pale and woe- begone. The troopers at the lower table were noisy and rude enough,
and Ranulph suspected that his entertainment had been ordered partly to keep them from getting
out of hand with drinking and rioting. He had contrived a clown's costume from some of his
belongings, aided by a little flour and paint, and a bauble made of a toasting fork stuck through
an apple. When he pranced into the hall the soldiers yelled with surprise and delight. Behind
him at a discreet distance came a small boy, also attired in antic fashion, carrying carefully
in both hands a huge pie. The cook was peeping through the screen to see what was going to happen.

Neither Ranulph nor Peirol gave so much as a glance at the captives, who were too much amazed
to say anything at first, and quickly saw the danger of any betraying comment. The troubadour
marched up to Biterres, asked permission to sing, and began a doggerel ballad about one Sir
Orpheus and his magic harp. The harp, as the song explained, had the power of luring pigeons,
rabbits, wild geese, lambs, sucking-pigs and even fish from the stewponds, into its owner's
dinner-pot, so that Orpheus never lacked for good living and became very fat. The bouillabaisse
of Marseilles, the Norman ragout of eels, the roast goose of Arles, the pigs' feet of Spain,
the partridge pasty of Periguex,--all the luscious dishes of a land of good eating were described
in a way that made these old campaigners howl with reminiscent joy. The rollicking, impudent
tune, the allusions to camp customs more notorious than honest, went straight to the heart
of the blackguard audience, and half the voices in the room promptly joined the chorus. Eurydice,
the singer went on, was an excellent cook, so renowned that the prince of the lower regions
abducted her, and Orpheus was allowed to regain possession of her only on the solemn condition
that she should make a pie for that sovereign every twelvemonth. This pie, according to the
final verse of the song, would now be cut, so that the company could see exactly what a Plutonian
banquet was like.

The troubadour borrowed a dagger from a man-at-arms, made one or two slashes at the ornate
crust of the pie--and out flew four live pigeons.

Then Peirol gave his birdlike call, and eluding the hands raised to catch them the pigeons
swooped down to him. Ranulph began to dance, playing his lute at the same time, and the boy
followed, with the doves flying above him just out of reach. In saucy improvised couplets the
troubadour called upon one and another to join the dancing, until before any one quite knew
what was happening, the company in the lower hall was drawn into a winding lengthening line
following the leaders in a sort of farandole. The hall was not large enough for this to go
on indefinitely, and Ranulph suddenly bolted into the outer air, where the shouting, laughing
crowd paused for breath--and the pigeons went soaring into the sky.

The party from the table on the dais came out to look on, and Garin de Biterres, as he saw
the mounting birds, grew suspicious. "Here, Jean! Michaud!" he said sharply. "Loose the hunting
hawks!"

Ranulph's heart missed a beat, but he dared not betray himself by a tremor. Hawks could be
trained to pursue carriers, but the doves had a fair start and might be able to get away. The
two birds of prey which the men brought were moreover not the type of hawk used especially
to hunt pigeons, but young falcons or tercels. The men bungled in handling them; they evidently
belonged to the castle, not to the troop. When they finally rose into the air, Pere Azuli,
the veteran blue pigeon, and Rien-du-Tout, the little dun-colored stray Peirol had trained,
were almost out of sight. The luckless Blanchette was lagging, and despite her frantic attempts
to escape her enemy she was soon struggling in the falcon's grip. Clair de la Lune, the other
white pigeon, seemed about to meet the same fate when something unexpected happened.

Two wild hawks, beating up from the south, spied the pigeons, and pounced one upon the tercel
with the dove in his talons, the other upon Clair de la Lune. In the scrimmage which followed
Blanchette's little body fell into the river, and the strange hawk gave chase to Pere Azuli,
while her mate began to devour Clair de la Lune at his leisure. The ruffled and bewildered
tercels were whistled back, and neither Garin de Biterres nor his prisoners could be certain
in the gathering twilight whether any of the pigeons had escaped their pursuers.

The pigeon-chase had taken the attention of de Biterres and his men so completely for a few
minutes that Ranulph, without seeming to do so, came near to Lady Philippa. A tiny roll of
paper encased in a withered leaf dropped from his fingers on the furred edge of her mantle.
She bent to shake off the leaf and her hand closed quietly over the letter. When Ranulph had
gone to sing ballads of the camp among the troopers, and the young girls had been ceremoniously
escorted to their guarded room, she unrolled and read the missive. It was not long. "Dear and
Honored Lady--I pray you pardon the fooleries of the night, since in this way only could I
hope to escape the surveillance of these miscreants and do you service. The pigeons we are
loosing bear messages telling of your doleful plight, and I doubt not that when it becomes
known, help will come to you. Sir Gualtier Giffard is, as you know, at your father's castle
awaiting messages from him, and we have thus every reason to hope that there will be no mishap.
For the rest, sweet lady, I rejoice that I am within these walls, because you are here, and
yet would I gladly go to the ends of the earth if so I might hasten your deliverance.

"Ever your servant,
 "RANULPH D'AVIGNON."

The loyal and generous words were like balm upon wounds. The last speech that Garin de Biterres
had made to her that night conveyed a terrifying possibility.

"Lady Philippa," his cold harsh voice had fallen upon her ears like the grating of a key in
a prison door, "your father once refused me your hand. I hope to find you more gracious, or
at least more compliant. My captain, Malemort, stands ready to wed the Lady Alazais as I would
wed you, at high noon to-morrow. The fate of the others depends upon you. As good Christian
maidens ye should all prefer Christian marriage to slavery among the Moslems,--but gold in
the purse is better than an unwilling bride."

It was not long after sunset when old Grimaud, Count Thibaut's gooseherd, was aroused from
a light sleep by a fluttering at his window. He found huddled on the sill a small dun pigeon
under whose wing nestled a roll of writing. According to instructions, he took it at once to
Sir Gualtier Giffard, who found therein Ranulph's statement of the tragedy impending at Montfaucon.
It was like the crater of a volcano suddenly opened in what had seemed a bright and fertile
valley. On the very borders of this paradise of luxury and delight lay a world where a thing
like this was possible. He strode hastily into the hall, told the news to the old knight, a
cousin of Count Thibaut's, who had charge of the castle for the time, and left him to order
out the garrison. Five minutes later he was riding at a breakneck pace on his own fleet horse,
to rouse the men who had so short a time since been guests of the Count, to the rescue of his
daughter and her companions.

Thus it came to pass that early next morning a sentinel at Montfaucon hurried from his watch-tower
to make report to Malemort, and Malemort lost no time in reporting to his chief. Peering from
an upper window they could see a strong force under the banner of Count Thibaut, flanked by
the devices of half Auvergne, coming at a sharp trot toward the castle. There was neither delay
nor discussion. Garin de Biterres had not found life altogether pleasant, but he had no wish
to end it with a rope around his neck. If some peasant had carried a report of his doings to
Count Thibaut there was nothing to do but flee the vengeance now on the way, and that instantly.
Without waiting even to close the gates the whole troop of mercenaries went galloping away.
When the rescuers clattered into the courtyard they found no one stirring save a little stout
man in a cook's apron, who was concocting something in a huge saucepan.

"I am Martin," he said to Savaric de Marsan. "I cook. But I do not cook for cannibals, and
my faith! I think that robber captain will end by devouring his fellow-men. I have no mind
to poison the food of his enemies, either, so when they went away I hid in the great tun. I
am at your service, master."

Savaric was so much amused at the explanation that he then and there decided to rescue Martin
from further evil company and place him in his own kitchen.

"There is some consolation for not catching Biterres," he observed to Ranulph later, "in getting
a cook like that little man. He deserves something, truly, for giving you the information he
did. And then, we are rid of Garin for good now. He will never come back to Auvergne.

"You should have seen that Norman madman when your message came. He had us under arms and riding
for dear life before we fairly understood what had happened. Yet from what Martin says, but
for your daring and ready wit no message could have come. You will not allow me to say what
I think of that, and therefore I suppose we must give all the credit to the victor in our tournament
of the pigeons,--little Sieur Rien-du-Tout!"

 THE JESTERS

 Where through the dapple of wood-shadows dreaming
   Faun-footsteps pattering run,
 Where the swift mountain-brooks silvery-gleaming
   Carol through rain and through sun,
 Thee do we follow, O Spirit of Gladness,--
   Thee to whom Laughter gave suck.
 We are thy people by night or by noontide,--
   We are thy loves, O Puck!

 Lips thou hast kissed have no pleasure in sadness,
   Bitterness, cant nor disdain.
 Hearts to thy piping beat bravely in gladness
   Through poverty, exile or pain.
 Gold is denied us--thine image we fashion
   Out of the slag or the muck.
 We are thy people in court or by campfire,--
   We are thy slaves, O Puck!

 We are the dancers whose morris-bells ringing
   Sound the death-knell of our years.
 We are the harpers who turn into singing
   Our hopes and our foves and our fears.
 Thine is the tribute wrung hard from our anguish
   After the death blows are struck.
 We are thy bondmen who jest while we languish,--
   We are thy souls, O Puck!

III

THE PUPPET PLAYERS

In a blinding snow-storm that blotted out the roads and obscured the outlines of the densely
forested mountains, two youths and a small donkey struggled over a mountain trail. Twice the
donkey had to be pulled bodily out of a drift, and once for an hour or more the wayfarers were
racked by the fear that they had lost their direction altogether. But at last, in the edge
of the evening, they saw the lights of the city twinkling like a miniature Milky Way, and urged
on their tired beast in the certainty of food and shelter at the end of the day.

They were very unlike, these two strangers. He who seemed the leader was a slender lad, dark
and keen of face, who might from his looks have been either French or Italian. In reality he
was a Milanese, Giovanni Bergamotto, the only survivor of one of the families driven out of
Milan when Barbarossa took the city. He had lived nearly half his life in France and in England,
and spoke several languages nearly or quite as well as his own.

The other was a big-shouldered, sullen-looking fellow with black eyes and hair and a skin originally
brown and now still darker from his out-of-door life--a Pyrenean mountaineer known as Cimarron.
It was doubtful if he himself knew what his name originally had been; to all who knew him now
he was Cimarron, the mountain sheep,--strong, sure-footed, and silent, and not half as stupid
as people often thought.

The two had been in Brittany, in Paris, in Sicily and in Castile during the past months, and
in each country they had made their way directly to the place in which the ruler happened to
be holding court. At court they had exhibited the marionette show now packed away in the donkey's
saddle- bags, once, twice or thrice as the case might be, until Giovanni had succeeded in gaining
audience with the wife of the ruler. He carried pedlar's goods of very choice varieties, which
might well appeal to ladies of the court in those days of slow transportation and few shops.

Now the King of England had three daughters, each of them being married to some prince of importance
on the Continent of Europe, and he had adopted this means of sending certain letters to be
given into their hands. The letter was carried inside a marionette, the head of the little
carved wooden figure being so made as to unscrew and reveal a deep narrow hole in the body.
The last of the three was Matilda, wife of Henry the Lion Duke of Saxony, the most powerful
vassal of Frederick Barbarossa; and Barbarossa and his court now occupied Goslar, the walled
city of Prussia which the two comrades were approaching. Giovanni wished to have the Emperor's
permission to go on to Saxony. It might save his being detained as a spy or interfered with
in some other way.

He wished also to discover how far the preparations for the invasion of Italy had gone. From
what he had heard he thought that Barbarossa was about to gather his forces. He himself intended
to join the army of the Lombard League as soon as he had delivered his letter.

There was not much difficulty in finding an inn where they could have supper, and sleep, rolled
up in their cloaks, on the floor in a corner of the common room. The donkey was unloaded and
fed, and the saddle-bags were brought in to serve as pillows. Having eaten, they lay down to
the dreamless sleep of healthy youth. Cimarron's mountain-bred ears caught the sound, two hours
after, of clanking swords and trampling horses, and he signaled silently to Giovanni. Troopers
clattered in, laughing, cursing, calling for this and that, and not seeing the two motionless
figures in the dark corner at all. When all was still again Cimarron whispered,

"Who are they?"

"They are Swabian cavalry," answered the other. "We were none too soon. The army is mustering
already."

Next morning Giovanni cast about for means to get inside the walls of the great castle, where
the Imperial banner floated in the cold blue air. But there seemed to be no disposition to
encourage foreigners. Cimarron, who could sometimes gain admittance as a horse-boy, was kicked
out. There was tumult and excitement in the streets. Giovanni, retreating to a narrow alley
to brush mud off his doublet, was aware that a man with keen observant eyes was regarding him
from the doorway of a wine-shop. The man wore the cap and bells of a jester, and his fantastic
costume was gorgeously colored and ornamented. He was drinking a cup of wine, and when that
was finished he poured another for himself and began to sip it slowly. Catching Giovanni's
eye, he asked,

"What's in those great saddle-bags, my friend?"

Giovanni nearly jumped, for the question was in his own native dialect-- not only Lombard but
the variety peculiar to Milan itself. But remembering that he must not betray his blood he
answered meekly, in French,

"I crave your pardon, master. I do not understand your question."

"I asked you," said the jester, "what you had in your luggage. It was an idle question, but
you might be a showman of Milan."

Giovanni laughed with mingled amusement and horror. "Milan, do you say? Is it safe to say that
name in Goslar? No, master, I am a poor showman from Paris, asking only the opportunity to
display my puppets before the great folk. 'Tis a goodly show, I assure you, master--the play
of the Ten Virgins. Having but six lady-figures I am forced to make them serve for the wise
and the foolish virgins and the bride, but there are also a King, who in this play is the bridegroom,
the Merchant, the Monk, the Jester-- who is most amusing and can dance upon his head or his
heels as you will. The figures were carved by the most skilful wood-carvers of Paris, and the
play was written by a pious monk of the Benedictines." (Padraig the scribe would have hooted
at this.) "It is a most wise and diverting entertainment, master, I do assure you." The jester
seemed not to be listening very attentively. He twirled the stem of the wine-cup in his hand,
crooning,

    "'Fantoccini, fantoccino,--
      Chi s'arrischia baldacchino,
      Ognuno per se,
      Diavolo per tutti.'"

Only long practice in self-control could have kept Giovanni from starting. The rhyme was a
common street-song which every lad in Milan, the city of puppet-shows, would recognize, and
not only did it refer to the puppets as "fantoccini" instead of marionettes, but the significance
of the last two lines, "Each for himself and the fiend for all," was rather too pointed to
be pleasant. But he only bowed uncomprehendingly and awaited the further comment of the singer
with more interest than comfort.

"I have a mind to speak a word for your puppet-show," said the jester, cradling his bauble
in his arms. "The Emperor gives little thought to such toys; nevertheless he may be graciously
pleased to spend a few minutes in that way to-night after supper. Follow me."

He strutted away, a small pompous figure in scarlet and orange, and Giovanni noted the mingled
deference and contempt with which he was regarded by the crowd. No more trouble was experienced
in getting the donkey along the crowded streets. The fool's discordantly-clashing bells opened
a way everywhere. The porter at the castle gate grinned and flung a jest at him, but admitted
him and those who followed in his train, without question.

A few steps farther on they were halted by a tall, thin, sour-looking man in the elaborate
headgear and robes of a dignitary of the household.

"How now, Master Stephen!" he said sternly. "What foolery is this?"

"Only a showman, Conrad," grinned the jester. "He has a puppet-show in those fat bags of his.
Did you think I was trying to smuggle meat-puddings out of the kitchens for my own solitary meals?"

The steward was not satisfied. "Show me the puppets," he ordered. Giovanni obeyed.

The steward scrutinized the bride and her maidens, pulled the strings which moved the humpbacked
jester, fingered the costumes, and then with a curt nod bade them go on. "But mind you, Master
Stephen," he said, shaking a long finger at the fool, "you are to be responsible for these
fellows and keep them in sight from now until the time of the feast. If aught goes amiss you
shall be whipt."

The jester giggled, shook his bells, and began to climb a long flight of stairs in a tower
opening on the courtyard, beckoning the two youths to follow him. Up and up they climbed, until
at last the fool turned and motioned them to halt.

"Come within," he said to Giovanni. "Let your servant await you with your baggage on the landing
here. He will tell us if any one approaches."

The room in which Giovanni found himself was a small wainscoted apartment in the top of the
tower, furnished in a grotesque fashion well suited to the humped and twisted figure of its
master. The jester flung off his tall curved cap and seated himself on the corner of a table.
From a flask he poured out a cup of wine and offered it to his guest. "It is not drugged,"
he said with a laugh, "you need not fear. No? Ah, well, perhaps you are right. I will drink
it myself, though I should keep it for the night--the nights are very long sometimes." 

This means a navy superior to those of its enemies. But it means also strategic bases equipped
for supplying a fleet for battle or offering refuge in defeat. To these bases there must run lines
of communication guarded from interruption by the enemy.

Imagine, for instance, the Suez or the Panama Canal held by a hostile force, or a battlefleet
cut off from its fuel supply of coal or oil.

The relation of shipping to sea power is not what it was in earlier days. Merchantmen are indeed
still useful in war for transport and auxiliary service, but it is no longer true that men in the
merchant service are trained for man-of-war service.

The difference between them has widened as the battleship of to-day
differs from a merchantman of to-day.

Nor can a merchantship be transformed into a cruiser, as in the American navy of a hundred
years ago. The place of shipping in sea power is therefore subsidiary. In fact, unless a nation
can control the sea, the amount of its wealth dispersed in merchantmen is just so much loss
in time of war.

The major element in sea power is the fleet, but possession of the largest navy is no guarantee
of victory or even of control of the sea. Size is important, but it is an interesting fact that
most of the great victories in naval history have been won by a smaller fleet over a larger. The
effectiveness of a great navy depends first on its quality, secondly,
on how it is handled, and thirdly, on its power of reaching the enemy's
communications.

The quality of a navy is two-fold, material and personal. In material, the great problem of
modern days is to keep abreast of the time.

The danger to a navy lies in conservatism and bureaucratic control. There is always the chance
that a weaker power may defeat the stronger, not by using the old weapons, but by devising
some new weapon that will render the old ones obsolete.

The trouble with the professional man in any walk of life has always been that he sticks to
the traditional ways. In consequence he lays himself open to the amateur, who, caring nothing about
tradition, beats him with something novel.

The inventions that have revolutionized naval warfare have come from men outside the naval profession.
Thus the Romans, unable to match the Carthaginians in seamanship, made that seamanship of
no value by their invention of the corvus. Greek fire not only saved the insignificant fleets
of the Eastern Empire, but annihilated the huge armadas of Saracen and Slav. If the South
in our Civil War had possessed the necessary resources, her ironclad rams would have made an
end of the Union navy and of the war.

In our own time the German submarine came within an ace of winning the war despite all the Allied
dreadnoughts, because its potentialities had not been realized and no counter measures devised.
A navy that drops behind is lost.

The personal side is a matter of training and morale. The material part is of no value unless it
is operated by skill and by the will to win. Slackness or inexperience or lack of heart in officers
or men--any of these may bring ruin. Napoleon once spoke of the Russian army as brave, but as
"an army without a soul." A navy must have a soul. Unfortunately, the tendency in recent years
has been to emphasize the material and the mechanical at the expense of the intellectual and
spiritual. With all the enormous development of the ships and weapons, it must be remembered
that the man is, and always will be, greater than the machine.

As to handling the navy, first of all the War Staff and the commander
in chief must solve the strategic problem correctly.

The fate of the Spanish Armada in the 16th Century and that of the Russian navy at the beginning
of the 20th are eloquent of the effect of bad strategy on a powerful fleet. Secondly, the commander
in chief must be possessed of the right fighting doctrine--the spirit of the offensive. In
all ages the naval commander who sought to achieve his purpose by avoiding battle went to disaster.
The true objective must be, now as always, the destruction of the enemy's fleet.

Such are the material and the spiritual essentials of sea power. The phrase has become so popular
that a superior fleet has been widely accepted as a talisman in war.

The idea is that a nation with sea power must win. But with all the tremendous "influence
of sea power on history," the student must not be misled into thinking that sea power is invincible.
The Athenian navy went to ruin under the catapults of Syracuse whose navy was insignificant.
Carthage, the sea power, succumbed to a land power, Rome. In modern times France, with a navy
second to England's, fell in ruin before Prussia, which had practically no navy at all. And
in the World War it required the entry of a new ally, the United States, to save the Entente
from defeat at the hands of land power, despite an overwhelming superiority on the sea.

The significance of sea power is communications. Just so far as sea control affects lines of
communications vital to either belligerent, so far does it affect the war. To a sea empire
like the British, sea control is essential as a measure of defense. If an enemy controls the
sea the empire will fall apart like a house of cards, and the British
Isles will be speedily starved into submission.

It is another thing, however, to make the navy a sword as well as a shield. Whenever the British
navy could cut the communications of the enemy, as in the case of the wars with Spain and Holland,
it was terribly effective. When it fought a nation like Russia in the Crimean War, it hardly touched
the sources of Russian supplies, because these came by the interior land communications. So
also the French navy in 1870 could not touch a single important line
of German communications and its effect therefore was negligible.

If in 1914 Russia, for example, had been neutral, no Allied naval
superiority could have saved France from destruction by the combined
armies of Germany and Austria, just as the Grand Fleet was powerless
to check the conquest or deny the possession of Belgium.

It must be borne in mind that a land power has the advantages of
central position and interior lines, and the interior lines of to-day
are those of rail and motor transport, offering facilities for a rapid
concentration on any front.

Of course, modern life and modern warfare are so complex that few nations are able to live and
wage war entirely on their own resources; important communications extend across the sea. In
this respect the United States is singularly fortunate. With the exception of rubber, every
essential is produced in our country, and the sea power that would attempt to strangle the
United States by a blockade on two coasts would find it unprofitable
even if it were practicable.

A hostile navy would have to land armies to strike directly at the
manufacturing cities near the seaboard in order to affect our communications.

In brief, sea power is decisive just so far as it cuts the enemy's communications.

Finally in considering sea power we should note the importance of coördinating naval policies
with national. The character of a navy and the size of a navy depend on what policy a nation
expects to stand for. It is the business of a navy to stand behind a nation's will. For Great
Britain, circumstances of position have long made her policy consistent,
without regard to change of party.

She had to dominate the sea to insure the safety of the empire. With the United States, the
situation has been different. The nation has not been conscious of any foreign policy, with
the single exception of the Monroe Doctrine. And even this has changed in character since it was first
enunciated.

At the present day, for example, how far does the United States purpose to go in the Monroe
Doctrine? Shall we attempt to police the smaller South and Central American nations? Shall we
make the Caribbean an area under our naval control?

What is to be our policy toward Mexico? How far are we willing to go to sustain the Open Door
policy in the Far East? Are we determined to resist the immigration of Asiatics? Are we bound
to hold against conquest our outlying possessions,--the Philippines,
Guam, Hawaiian Islands, and Alaska?

Shall we play a "lone hand" among nations, or join an international league? Until there is
some answer to these questions of foreign policy, our naval program is based on nothing definite.
In short, the naval policy of a nation should spring from its national policy.

On that national policy must be based not only the types of ships built and their numbers, but
also the number and locale of the naval bases and the entire strategic plan. In the past there
has been too little mutual understanding between the American navy and the American people.
The navy--the Service, as it is appropriately called--is the trained
servant of the republic.

It is only fair to ask that the republic make clear what it expects that servant to do. But before
a national policy is accepted, it must be thought out to its logical
conclusion by both the popular leaders and naval advisers.

As Mahan has said, "the naval officer must be a statesman as well
as a seaman."

 Is the policy accepted going to conflict with that
 of another nation; if so, are we prepared
 to accept the consequences?
 
 The recent history of Germany is a striking example of the effect
of a naval policy on international relations.

 The closing decade of the 19th century found Great
 Britain still following the policy of "splendid
 isolation," with France and Russia her traditional
 enemies. Her relations with Germany were
 friendly, as they always had been. At the
 close of the century, the Kaiser, inspired
 by Mahan's "Influence of Sea Power on
 History," launched the policy of a big navy. First,
 he argued, German commerce was growing with astonishing
 rapidity. It was necessary, according to Mahan,
 to have a strong navy to protect a great carrying trade.

 This von Tirpitz[1] emphasizes, though
 he never makes clear just what precise
 danger threatened the German trading fleets, provided
 Germany maintained a policy of friendly relations
 with England. Secondly, Germany found herself
 with no outlet for expansion.

 The best colonial fields had already been appropriated
 by other countries, chiefly England.
 To back up German claims to new territory or trading
 concessions, it was necessary to have a strong
 navy. All this was strictly by
 the book, and it is characteristic of the German mind that it faithfully
followed the text.

 "Unsere Zukunft," cried the Kaiser, "liegt
 auf dem Wasser!" But what was implied in
 this proposal? A great navy increasing rapidly
 to the point of rivaling that of England could be regarded by that
country only as a pistol leveled at her head.

 England would be at the mercy of any power that
 could defeat her navy. And this policy
 coupled with the demand for "a place
 in the sun," threatened the rich colonies
 that lay under the British flag. It
        could not be taken otherwise.

 
 
 [Footnote 1: MY MEMOIRS, Chap. xv and passim.]

These
 implications began to bear fruit after their kind. In
 the place of friendliness on the part
        of the English,--a friendliness uninterrupted by war, and based on
the blood of their royal family and the comradeship in arms against
France in the days of Louis XIV, Frederick the Great, and Napoleon--there
developed a growing hostility.

 In vain missions were sent by the British
 Government to promote a better understanding,
 for the Germans declined to accept either a
 "naval holiday" or a position of perpetual
 naval inferiority. In consequence, England abandoned
        her policy of isolation, and came to an understanding with her ancient
enemies, Russia and France.

 Thus Germany arrayed against herself all the resources
 of the British Empire and in this act signed
 her own death warrant.
 
 A final word as to the future of sea power. The influence
 of modern inventions is bound to affect the significance of the sea
in the future.

Oceans have practically dwindled away as national barriers.

Wireless and the speed of the modern steamship have reduced the oceans
to ponds.

"Splendid isolation" is now impossible. Modern artillery placed at Calais, for instance, could
shell London and cover the transportation of troops in the teeth of a fleet. Aircraft cross
land and sea with equal ease. The submersible has come to stay. Indeed, it looks as if the navy
of the future will tend first to the submersible types and later abandon the sea for the air,
and the "illimitable pathways of the sea" will yield to still more illimitable pathways of the sky.
The consequence is bound to be a closer knitting of the peoples of
the world through the conquering of distance by time.

This bringing together breeds war quite as easily as peace, and the progress of invention makes
wars more frightful. The closely knit economic structure of Europe did not prevent the greatest
war in history and there is little hope for the idea that wars can never occur again. The older
causes of war lay in pressure of population, the temptation of better lands, racial hatreds or
ambitions, religious fanaticism, dynastic aims, and imperialism. Some of these remain. The chief
modern source of trouble is trade rivalry, with which imperialism is closely interwoven and
trade rivalry makes enemies of old friends. There is, therefore,
a place for navies still.

At present there are two great naval powers, Great Britain and the
United States.

A race in naval armaments between the two would be criminal folly, and could lead to only one
disastrous end. The immediate way toward guaranteeing freedom of the seas is a closer entente between
the two English-speaking peoples, whose common ground extends beyond their speech to institutions
and ideals of justice and liberty. The fine spirit of cöoperation produced by the World War should
be perpetuated in peace for the purpose of maintaining peace. In his memoirs van Tirpitz mourns
the fact that now "Anglo-Saxondom" controls the world. There is small danger that where public
opinion rules, the two peoples will loot the world to their own advantage. On the other hand,
there is every prospect that, for the immediate future, sea power in their hands can be made
the most potent influence toward peace, and the preservation of that inheritance of civilization
which has been slowly accumulated and spread throughout the world by those peoples of every age
who have been the pathfinders on the seas.

INDEX

A.

Abercromby, British general Aboukir, Hogue, and Cressy, British cruisers, loss of Aboukir Bay, battle
of, see Nile Actium, campaign of; battle of Ægospotami, battle of
Agrippa, Roman admiral Aircraft, in World War Albuquerque, Portuguese
viceroy Alfred, king of England Algeciras Convention Ali Pasha, Turkish
admiral Allemand, French admiral Almeida, Portuguese leader Amboyna
Amiens, treaty of Amsterdam Anthony, Roman general, at Actium Antwerp
Arabs, at war with Eastern Empire; as traders; ships of Arbuthnot,
British admiral Ariabignes, Persian admiral Aristides Armada, see
Spanish Armada Armed Neutrality, league of Armor Armstrong, Sir William
Athens, see Greece Audacious, British ship August 10, battle of Austerlitz
battle of Austria, in Napoleonic Wars; at war with Italy; in Triple
Alliance; in World War

B.

Bacon, Roger Bagdad Railway Bantry Bay,
action in; attempted landing in Barbarigo, Venetian admiral Barbarossa,
Turkish admiral Barham, First Lord of Admiralty Bart, Jean, French
naval leader Battle cruiser, see Ships of War Beachy Head, battle
of Beatty, British admiral, at Heligoland Bight; at Dogger Bank; at
Jutland Berlin Decree Bismarck Blake, British admiral Blockade, in
American Civil War; in World War Boisot, Dutch admiral Bonaparte,
see Napoleon Bossu, Spanish admiral Boxer Rebellion Boyne, battle
of Bragadino, Venetian general Breda, peace of Bridport, British admiral
Brill, capture of Brueys, French admiral Burney, British admiral Bushnell,
David

C.

Cabot, John Cadiz, founded; British expeditions to; blockaded
by Blake; blockaded by Jervis; Allied fleet in Calder, British admiral;
in action with Villeneuve Camara, Spanish admiral Camperdown, battle
of Canidius, Roman general Carden, British admiral Carpenter, Alfred,
British commander Carthage, founded; at war with Greece; in Punic
Wars Cervantes Cervera, Spanish admiral; in Santiago campaign Ceylon
Champlain, battle of Lake Charlemagne Charles II of England Charles
V of Spain Charleston, attack on Chatham, raided by Dutch Chauncey,
U. S. commodore China, in ancient times; first ships to; at war with
Japan; in disruption Chios, battle of Churchill, Winston Cinque Ports
Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, in Actium campaign Clerk, John Collingwood,
British admiral; at Trafalgar Colonna, admiral of Papal States Colport,
British admiral Columbus; voyages of Commerce, of Phoenicians; under
Roman Empire; with the East; in northern Europe; in modern times Commerce
Warfare, in Dutch War of Independence; in Napoleonic Wars; in War
of 1812; in World War, Communications, in warfare Compass, introduction
of Condalmiero, Venetian admiral Conflans, French admiral Constantinople,
founded; attacked by Arabs; attacked by Russians; sacked by Crusaders;
captured by Turks; in World War Continental System Continuous Voyage,
doctrine of Contraband Convoy, System in World War Cook, Captain James
Copenhagen, battle of Corinthian Gulf, battle of Cornwallis, British
admiral Coronel, battle of Corsica Corunna, Armada sails from; attacked
by Drake; Allied fleet in Corvi Cradock, British admiral, at Coronel
Crete Cromwell, Oliver Custozza, battle of Cyprus

D.

Da Gama, Vasco
Dardanelles, German squadron enters; campaign of Darius, king of Persia
De Grasse, French admiral, at Virginia Capes; at Saints' Passage De
Guichen, French admiral Denmark, in Copenhagen campaign De Ruyter,
Dutch admiral D'Estaing, French admiral Destroyer, see Ships of War
Dewa, Japanese admiral Dewey, U. S. admiral, at Manila De Witt, Dutch
admiral Diaz, Bartolomeo Diedrichs, German admiral Director fire Dirkzoon,
Dutch admiral Diu, battle of Dogger Bank, Russian fleet off; action
off Don Juan of Austria, at Lepanto Doria, Andrea, Genoese admiral
Doria, Gian Andrea, Genoese admiral Dragut, Turkish commander Drake,
Sir Francis, British admiral, voyages of; in Armada campaign; last
years of Dreadnought, see Ships of War Drepanum, battle of Duguay-Trouin,
French commander Duilius, Roman consul Dumanoir, French admiral Duncan,
British admiral, at Camperdown Dungeness, battle of

E.

East Indies
Companies, British and Dutch Ecnomus, battle of Egypt, early ships
of; Napoleon in Elizabeth, queen of England Emden, German cruiser;
cruise of England, early naval history of; at war with Spain; at war
with Holland; at war with France; plans for invasion of.

 But when he was asked if he would like to be a monk, he shook his head like a colt
eager to be off. Writing was great fun; he practiced with a stick in the sand or charcoal on
a stone. But it did not suit his idea of life to sit all day long filling books with page after
page of writing.

He liked the making of colors even better than writing. In the twelfth century painters could
not buy paints wherever they might chance to be. They had to make them. Brother Basil had studied
in Constantinople, or Byzantium as he called it, the treasure-house of books and of learning,
with its great libraries and its marvelous old parchments illuminated in colors too precious
to be used except for the Gospels or some rare volume of the Church. As time went on Padraig
learned all that Brother Basil could teach him.

When a man is working on an important and difficult task, it means much to have a helper tending
the fires or grinding the paints, who regards the work as the most important thing in the world
and gives his whole mind to his occupation. Such a helper may ask as many questions as he likes,
and his master will be glad to give him all the instruction he can possibly want.

Most of the people of the Abbey, in fact, liked Padraig. He knew so little that the monks and
lay brothers and even the novices knew, and learned so quickly, and was so ready to put his
own knowledge at their disposal, that it gave them the very comfortable feeling of being superior
persons, whenever he was about. But there was one person who did not like him. This was Simon,
a clerk attached to the house of the Irish prince who had given the land for the Abbey. Simon
was of the opinion that vagabond urchins from no one knew where were not proper pupils for
monastic schools even in Ireland, which was on the extreme western edge of Christendom. But
Brother Basil paid no attention to Simon's opinion. In fact, it is doubtful whether he ever
knew that Simon had one.

The most serious trouble Brother Basil had in his work was that many of the materials he needed
could not be had in Ireland, nor could the Abbey afford to send for them except in very small
quantities. The monks were rich compared with most other folk about them. They had food and
drink and warm clothing and well-built houses, and productive land. But as yet they could not
sell much of their produce at a profit which would make them rich in money. Brother Basil therefore
manufactured all the colors he could, from the resources at hand. To make blue, he pounded
up a piece of an old stone he had brought from Canterbury. Gilding was done by making gold-leaf
out of real gold. The Tyrian purple was made from a gastropod of the seas near Byzantium, and
a little snail-like mollusk of Ireland would serve to make a crimson like it. Thinning it,
the painter could make pink. There was no vermilion to be had, and red lead must be used for
that color and made by roasting white lead. The white lead was prepared by putting sheets of
lead in vats of grape skins when the wine had been crushed out of them. Copper soaked in fermenting
grape skins would make green, saffron made it a yellower green,--and saffron was grown on the
Abbey land--cedar balsam would make it more transparent. Brother Basil was always trying experiments.
He was always glad to see a new plant or mineral which might possibly give him a new color.

In all this Padraig was extremely useful. He made friends with a smith who had a forge and
furnace miles away, and wheedled him into lending them the furnace for the roasting of metals.
He ranged the woods and cliffs all around the Abbey in search of plants, shrubs, trees and
minerals. His knowledge of the country saved Brother Basil many a weary tramp, and he always
took Padraig with him when he went looking for any especial thing that was needed.

It was some time, however, before Padraig learned what Brother Basil needed most of all. Now
that the work of the scriptorium was coming to be known, orders were received for splendidly
illuminated missals and other volumes, for which gilding was necessary. The brilliant colors
would lose half their beauty without the decorative touches of gilding to set them off. And
gold was costly.

"Where do men get gold?" Padraig asked one day.

"Out of the earth," answered Brother Basil absently.

"I mean," said Padraig hesitating, "what is it like when it is in the earth? Is it a different
color--like copper?" Copper, he knew, was often green when it was found.

"Gold is always gold," said Brother Basil, coming out of his fit of dreamy abstraction. "I
have seen it washed out of rivers. Gold is heavier than gravel, and when the river carries
the gold with the earth down from the mountains, the gold sinks to the bottom."

Padraig said no more, but a day or two later he was missing. The Abbot was not pleased, for
now he would have to take a man from other work to do what the boy had been doing. Brother
Basil was surprised and hurt. He had never had such a pupil, and had begun to hope that they
might always work together for the love of the work and the glory of their Church.

"I suppose he was tired of us," Brother Basil said with a sigh. "He is only a boy."

But Padraig was only a few miles away, high up among the hills where a stream flowed through
a ravine,--digging. He remembered seeing something there long ago, before ever he came to the
Abbey. He worked for two or three days without finding anything at all. Then, just at sunset,
he saw a gleam of something like sunshine in a shadow where no sun shone. He grubbed like a
mole for a few minutes, and half a dozen tiny grains of gold lay in his palm.

There was not much gold in the stream, but there was some. He dug and pried and washed the
scanty soil until he was sure that no more was there, and then toward evening of the next day
started home to the Abbey. When he reached the gate it was dark, and the porter was astonished
to see him.

By the light of a rush candle Brother Basil and the Abbot looked at the precious grains of
river-washed gold, twinkling like fairy stars. Brother Basil's heart was content, not only
because of the gold, but because his most promising pupil, the wild herd-boy from the mountains,
had not really been weary of the work, but had proved his love for it and for his master.

The most excited person who heard of the discovery Padraig had made was Simon the clerk. He
had never lived in any country where gold could be picked up in the streams, and he did not
know, as Brother Basil did, that these little dots of gold-dust had probably been washed down
from some rocky height miles away. He badgered Padraig in the hope of making him tell where
he had found them, but Padraig would not. It was one of his best fishing-places, and he had
no mind to have it ruined by a gold-hungry clerk, seeking what had been put there for Brother
Basil.

At last he grew tired of Simon's questioning, and took him aside and told him a secret.

"I wonder," said Brother Basil, as he and his pupil went along a hillside one day at the long,
swinging trot they kept for long excursions, "what Simon the clerk is doing there by the marsh.
He seems to be looking for something."

"He is," said Padraig with an impish grin. "He thinks the Cluricaune comes there mornings to
catch frogs, and if he can catch the Cluricaune he can make him tell where all his gold is."

Brother Basil bit his lips to keep back a smile. "Now I wonder," he said gravely, "who could
have told him such a tale?"

"I did," said Padraig. "That is, I said old Granny Dooley told it to me when I was small. I've
hid in the bushes to watch for the Cluricaune myself."

CAP O'RUSHES

 Where the downward-swaying branches
   Shiver, quiver in the sun,
 And with low persistent murmur
   The hidden waters run,
 Far from bell and book and candle
   With their grisly ban,
 In the tangle of the rushes
   Sits the great god Pan.

 Oh, the unworn joy of living
   Is not far to find,--
 Leave the bell and book and candle
   Of the world behind,
 In your coracle slow drifting,
   Without haste or plan,
 You shall catch the wordless music
   Of the great god Pan.

 You shall wear the cap of rushes,
   And shall hear that day
 All the wild duck and the heron
   And the curlew say.
 You shall taste the wild bees' honey
   That since life began
 They have hidden for their master--
   For the great god Pan.

 You who follow in the pathway
   Of the waters fleet,
 You shall tread the gold of springtime
   'Neath your careless feet,
 Gold the hasting rivers gathered
   Without thought of man,--
 Flung aside as hushed they listened
   To the pipes of Pan!

V

THE TAPESTRY CHAMBER

Lady Philippa sat with her little daughter Eleanor in the tapestry chamber. This was the only
corner of the gray old Norman castle which seemed really their own. All the rest of it was
under the rule of Sir Stephen Giffard, the eldest son of the house, and still more under the
rule of his mother, Lady Ebba, who seemed more like a man than a woman and managed everything,
in-doors and out, including her sons. Eleanor, watching her grandmother with shy observant
eyes, was not quite sure whether her father came under that rule or not. He never disputed
anything his mother said or opposed her will, but somehow, when he saw that his sweet Provencal
wife wanted anything, he contrived that she should have it.

Eleanor could not help seeing, however, that her mother was careful not to appear discontented
or melancholy, and to do all that a daughter could do for her husband's stern old mother. Both
Sir Stephen Giffard and Sir Walter, Eleanor's father, were away most of the time, and if Lady
Philippa had been disposed to make herself unhappy she might have been exceedingly miserable.
The old chatelaine did not approve of luxury, even such small luxuries as were almost necessities
in that vast pile of stone which was the inheritance of the Norman Giffards. The castle hall
was as grim and bare as a guard-room except on state occasions, and the food was hardly better
on the master's table than below the salt, where the common folk ate. To be sure, there was
plenty to eat, such as it was. The old lord, who had been dead for many years now, had married
the daughter of a Saxon earl when he was a young knight in England, and Lady Ebba had been
used to plentiful provision in the house of her father. In the autumn, when the other castles
in the neighborhood sent forth gay hunting parties, and the deep forest, whose trees had never
known the ax since Caesar built his bridges in Gaul, rang to the hunting horns, there was no
such merrymaking on the Giffard lands. Instead, the folk were salting down beef and fish and
pork--particularly pork, from the herds of swine that roamed the woods feeding on the acorns
and beech mast. Toward the end of the winter there seemed to be more pork than anything else
on the table.

Lady Philippa had ruled her father's house when she was a girl of fourteen, and she could have
taught the people a different way of living. She knew how to raise and care for the great variety
of poultry, water- fowl, pigeons, hares, fish, and delicate small birds of many kinds, such
as some of their neighbors had and the southern provinces of France enjoyed in even greater
abundance. But Lady Ebba would have none of it. Fowls had to be carefully tended, protected
from foxes, hawks and other enemies; the fierce half-wild hogs could take care of themselves.
All that they needed was a peasant herdsman with a dog to keep them together and see that thieving
neighbors did not help themselves. There was more food in one hog than in a whole covey of
game birds, to say nothing of the trouble of catching and cooking the birds.

Neither did the old dame approve of tapestried walls, cups and bowls of silver, gold and enamel,
flower-gardens or delicately-made dishes. Fortunately her daughter-in-law's herb-garden was
not wholly under the ban. It contained herbs useful in medicine, and God has ordained that
many useful plants are also beautiful in their season. Sage, balm, caraway, monk's hood, thyme,
thrift, mint, and other plants therefore dwelt contentedly in a sunny nook of the castle. The
Provence roses, lilies and violets needed little care, and having once taken root were not
ousted. One reason may have been that on special occasions perfumed water was offered to some
guest of importance, for the washing of the hands after eating. By her manner though not in
words Lady Ebba conveyed the idea that it was as well to have some one in the house who had
time and taste for such things. The embroidering of tapestries and rich robes, and the repairing
of such vestments as had come to mending, might also be done by the person who had time for it.

The pleasantest hours in Eleanor's day were those that she spent with her mother in the tapestry
chamber. Whenever the weather would allow it they sat there during the sunny hours of the day,
and if Sir Walter was at home, or it was very cold and some important piece of work must be
done, they could have a brazier of charcoal to keep them warm. There was no fireplace in the room.

It was not a very large room, and it was stone-floored and stone-walled. It was Lady Philippa's
bedchamber. The bed was oak, built into the wall like a cupboard, and almost black with age.
There were carved doors of oak that could be shut, making it look like an armoire, but these
were usually open, displaying pillow-slips of fine linen and a linen coverlet, spun, woven,
and embroidered with black silk, by the lady herself. On the floor were strewn rushes and fragrant
herbs. There were two straight carved chairs of old oak, an ivory footstool and a small table
which held a few books and an ebony work-box inlaid with ivory, and writing materials. Two
carved chests set one on the other served as wardrobe. As for washing conveniences, these were
brought in as they were needed, by the knight's body-servant or the lady's own maid. The real
luxury in the room was the window, which was more than twice the size of the narrow slits that
lighted the great hall, and opened to the south. On pleasant days the sun looked in early and
lingered late, as if he loved the room and its gentle mistress.

The room had been much the same for more than a hundred years, the castle having been built
during the tenth century. The thing that made it Lady Philippa's own particular room, which
could have belonged to no one else, was the set of soft yet brilliant tapestries which covered
the walls. They had been worked by her in her girlhood, and she sometimes felt that more than
half her life was wrought into the quaint figures and innumerable flowers and leaves and emblems
of those narrow panels of embroidery. They had adorned the room which had been hers in her
father's castle, and single panels had curtained or covered wall-spaces in many other castles
during her life as Queen Eleanor's maid of honor. Little Eleanor had heard the story of the
pictures as soon as she was old enough to hear stories at all, and there was some story connected
with the making of each part of the set. It presented in a series of scenes the history of
Sainte Genevieve of Paris. In the first picture she was shown as a little girl tending her
sheep; then there were pictures of her at the various exciting times in her life--her saving
the people from the Huns, her staying of the plague, her audience with King Clovis and finally
her peaceful old age among the people who loved her.

Eleanor was kneeling on the window-seat where she sometimes slept, her bright braids falling
over her white linen underdress and gown of soft blue wool. "Mother," she said earnestly, "I
wish I could make some tapestry."

Lady Philippa was deftly drawing together the edges of a rent in an old and magnificent gold-embroidered
bed-curtain. "Have you finished your spinning, daughter?" she asked.

"N-o, but it is almost done. Mother, I will spin twice as much every day if you will teach
me to do tapestry. Were you older than I am when you learned?"

"Not very much older. Perhaps you might begin now. Finish your task while I make this curtain
whole, and we will see."

When her mother said she would "see," Eleanor knew that a favor was as good as granted. She
spun away to a happy little song that Collet, her mother's maid, had taught her, and very soon
the good linen thread was all wound smoothly and the little spinster sat demurely watching
the preparations for her new undertaking.

First her mother opened the wardrobe chest and took out a strip of linen about twenty inches
wide and of a brownish cream-color. Next she selected some skeins of dyed linen thread from
a heap of all the colors of the rainbow, mementoes of the work her busy fingers had done during
many years. In a little enameled box, very carefully wrapped in soft wool to keep them from
rusting, were a few needles. Out of a wrapping of cotton paper came a thin stick of charcoal
rather like a crayon--charred hard wood that could be used for drawing.

"Now," said the lady smiling at the eager little face, "what shall we choose for the subject
of your tapestry, and what is to be its use? Will you have it for a cushion, or a panel of
a screen, or something else?"

"I think--a set of panels," said Eleanor slowly. "It will take a long time, but I should like
to do exactly like you."

Lady Philippa gave a little, amused, affectionate laugh that ended in a sigh. "But, my dear
child, you don't think of copying these?"

"N-o. But when I grow up I want my room to look like yours. I want the tapestry to have a story.
Mother, do you think I could work the story of Saint George and the dragon? I like that best
of all."

Eleanor drank in all the tales told her so delightedly that her mother had never known she
liked one much more than another. "But," she said smiling, "Saint George was an English saint.
He was born in Coventry."

"That's why he is my favorite," Eleanor explained. "You know father is English. And Saint George
had so many adventures. I think he would be very interesting to do."

"It is your tapestry, dear child," her mother said, laughing her sweet, joyous laugh. "I am
sure I think Saint George and the dragon would make a very handsome set. And we need not draw
all the designs now. Perhaps by- and-by we shall know some one who will draw a dragon for us.
Meanwhile you may begin on the first panel."

Eleanor flung her arms around her mother. "Oh, mother dearest, it's so good of you. I'm so
excited to begin. Please commence at the very first part of the story, for that will be easy."

"Not so easy as you think, perhaps, sweetheart. However, we can but try. You mean the setting
forth of the knight?"

"No, the time when he was a little boy, and the weird woman of the woods took him away and
taught him everything. I like that part almost best of all."

"Very well. That will be a wise beginning, for in embroidering the trees and flowers of the
forest you will learn all the different stitches. You will have to embroider quite well before
beginning on the figures."

Eleanor leaned breathless over the table while her mother drew the outlines of the picture
upon the linen--the witch-woman in her forest home, the straight, sturdy figure of small George
standing before her. On two sides and the bottom of the panel were drawn gnarled and twisted
tree- trunks and roots, ferns and flowers. Across the top a narrow conventional border was
outlined, the cross of Saint George alternating with a five- petaled rose, the wild rose of
England.

"You may begin the border now," said Lady Philippa, threading a needle with brown thread. "This
is outline stitch, and the design must all be outlined with this, using different colors according
to the part of it you are working. Then each space is to be filled in with another stitch--you
see it here in the tapestry. For the background we will use still another stitch, and when
you are covering large spaces the work is to be done in tent-stitch. Every inch of this linen
will be covered with embroidery when it is finished, you know."

Eleanor looked very grave and responsible. She saw long years of work before her, occupied
with the triumphant career of the soldier-saint. But the new work proved so fascinating that
an hour had gone by before she knew it. It was hard to tear herself away and go down to the
chilly stone hall. She was not expected to come very near the fire of blazing logs, and felt
her grandmother's eye constantly upon her lest she should not sit erect or behave as a well-born
maiden should. She felt also that if Lady Ebba knew how much time would be consumed by the
adventures of Saint George, she would begin a calculation of the number of skeins of linen
thread that might be spun in that time, to the enrichment of the family. Eleanor privately
thought that there was bed-linen in the castle to last for at least twenty years--which was true.

Letters had been received at the castle that day. Sir Walter was on his way home, and with
him an English knight who had been his friend for many years--ever since they were squires
together in Normandy. Lady Philippa looked rather sad and wistful when she spoke of Sir Hugh
l'Estrange. He had married her dearest childhood friend, Alazais de Montfaucon, and Alazais
was dead. She had gone a bride into that foreign land, lived seven happy years, and died. Eleanor
could not help wondering whether she should ever have any friends who were dear to her as these
early friends were to her father and mother. She had never played with any other children at all.

The news of her father's coming had traveled more slowly than he himself did. The next day,
while Eleanor and her mother were busy transplanting some asphodel, the horn blew at the gate,
and in a few minutes the knight came striding across the turf and caught his wife in one arm
and his daughter in the other. Behind him was a great tall man with laughing eyes and a rather
sad mouth, and standing very straight and soldierly beside the stranger was a boy some two
years older than Eleanor, whom Sir Hugh introduced as "my son, Roger."

The following days were so full of excitement that little time was left for the tapestry chamber.
The two knights were on their way southward to meet King Henry and aid him to pacify some of
his turbulent subjects. Roger was to be left at the castle. It was usual for a knight to send
his sons to some friend for training during the years when a boy must learn the duties of page
and esquire. In this case there was more than usual reason for it, for Sir Hugh's castle was
in a remote part of England and it would not be safe to leave his only son there during his
absence.

Roger himself, while he frankly admitted that he did not much like leaving England, was keenly
interested in all that he saw and heard. Soon it seemed as if he had always been at home in
the old Norman castle. He called Lady Ebba "grandame," as Eleanor had never dared to do, and
though she was as strict with him as she was with every one else, she never seemed exactly
displeased with him. Roger himself saw it.

"Why do you like boys better than girls?" he asked her point blank, one day.

"Men can fight," Lady Ebba answered, curtly.

"Of course," Roger reflected. "But women can make men fight. Father told me that once when
the Danes tried to take your father's castle you held them off until he came back."

Lady Ebba did not say anything. She rose and stalked away, but although her back was to Roger,
Eleanor could see that she was actually smiling.

Eleanor knew that story. It gave her a feeling of enormous admiration and awe when she thought
of it, but love--for a grandmother who had commanded a garrison, on scanty rations, besieged
by fierce and bloodthirsty pirates--seemed a little out of place.

It was certainly far pleasanter, having Roger for a playmate. Eleanor thought it was better
than having a sister. He taught her to run, to fish, to play bowls, nine-men-morris, and draughts.
The dismal stone hall was not half so grim with Roger in her corner.

These diversions did not, however, interrupt the daily lessons, the task in spinning, or the
newly-begun tapestry. To her great satisfaction Eleanor found that Roger liked the tapestry
chamber nearly or quite as well as she did. When he saw Eleanor's tapestry he persuaded Sir
Hugh l'Estrange to spend a rainy morning in making sketches for it.

"Father has been to Egypt and the other places," he explained, "and knows just how they look.
You never saw a dragon, though, father?" he added doubtfully.

"Not exactly, but I have seen a beast rather like one," laughed the knight, and he drew a very
fair picture of a crocodile, adding wings and a fiery breath and fearsome talons by way of
establishing its dragonship. "I have seen the place where they say the monster was killed.
And did you know that Saint George is said to have helped the Allies under Godfrey in the First
Crusade, at the battle for Jerusalem?" While the children looked on in fascinated wonder, he
sketched in a battle-scene--rather cramped for space because of the narrow linen web--showing
Godfrey de Bouillon cheering on his knights, the saint on his great white horse leading the
charge, and the banner of the Cross rising above the host. From the tapestried walls Sainte
Genevieve and her people looked on with kindly interest at the little group.

When the two fathers had gone away life settled into a quiet but pleasant order. Roger shared
some of Eleanor's lessons, and when she was at her spinning or needlework he was often by,
with a bow to shape, a spear to polish or some other in-door work to do, while they listened
to Lady Philippa's stories. To him nearly all of them were new.

As the spring advanced the three spent much time in the garden. A drain was needed in one place,
and Roger retrieved a spade from the gardener's quarters and went at it. He had heard Lady
Philippa say that she should like to have a "mount" there--an artificial hill made of packed
earth and stones--and as he dug he threw the dirt inward and tramped it down. He explained
that this was the way a castle mount was made if the hill selected was not high enough. The
one at Lewes that William de Warenne had made was a hundred and fifty feet high.

Eleanor caught the enthusiasm, brought stones and helped tread them down with her stout little
leather shoes, and old Jehan's grandson with his sabots helped also.

"Wouldn't it be beautiful if we could build a castle on the top?" Eleanor suggested as they
stood looking at it.

"Perhaps we can--if your mother is willing. Ask her if we may have all the stones we pick out
of the garden--if we don't harm the plants--will you, Eleanor?"

Eleanor climbed the winding stairs to the tapestry chamber, and came flying back with the glad
permission. Then the small building force went to work in deep earnest.

"I know exactly how to build it, for I saw the building of our castle from the very first,"
Roger explained.

"We lived in a tent all summer until it was done--part of it--so that we could have a room.
First they dig a ditch, just like this one, around the mount, and they make a palisade of forest
trees--whole trunks set close together--to keep off enemies. When they have time to build a
stone wall, of course the wooden wall is taken down.

"Now here, on the most solid side of the mount, is the place for the keep. We use the biggest
stones for that. The bottom storey of father's keep is partly cut right out of the rock, and
the walls are twenty-five or thirty feet thick. Nobody can knock down that wall with a battering-ram!
Here we'll make a great arched door, so that the knights can ride right in without dismounting
when they're hard pressed by the enemy. Here's the drawbridge--" Roger hastily whittled off
a piece of bark--"and this line I've scratched inside the outer wall is for the wall round
the inner bailey. We'll have a watch-tower here--and here--and here. Father says that a good
builder places his towers so that each one protects one or two others, and in the end every
one is protected.

"In the storey above will be the great hall. These walls don't need to be so thick--not more
than eighteen feet. Here on this side we'll cut a little room out of the thickness of the wall,
for the private chamber of my lord and lady--"

"The tapestry chamber!" cried Eleanor.

"Yes," Roger went on, "and here on the other side we have the well- chamber. There's a stone
bason with a shaft that goes away down to the well in the lowest part of the castle, and the
defenders can always get water by lowering a bucket when they're besieged. Up above is another
storey for a guard-room, and a flat roof with battlements around it, where the sentinels can
see for miles and miles across the country."

The two children gazed at their castle mount and almost believed the walls, eighteen, twenty,
thirty feet thick--rising before their eyes.

"But that isn't all of the castle," said Eleanor at last.

"No; we'll build more towers after awhile, and have a banquet hall to entertain the King. And
the soldiers and people will live in tents and wattled huts until the stonework is done. But
the keep is the first thing to build, because, you see, you have to defend yourself from enemies
no matter when they come."

Lady Philippa's garden was cleared of stones in a much shorter time than she had expected.
But to build a stone wall simply by laying one stone upon another is less easy than it seems.
Roger had done something of the sort before, but he had had fragments of stone from the masons'
work instead of water-washed pebbles. And when the keep was actually built as high as the first
floor above the foundation, a heavy rain came, streams tore out one side of the mount, and
the stone-work tumbled into a hopeless ruin.

In the crystal brilliance of the morning after the storm Roger surveyed it ruefully. "Father
says," he recalled, "that everything depends on the foundations. We'll do it over again and
make the mount more solid."

"And when it is done," said Eleanor, never losing faith, "I'll beg some linen of mother and
make tapestry for the walls of the little room and the great hall."

But the stones would not stay in place. Roger tried plastering them with mud, then with clay.
Neither would hold when dry. Then he saw a workman repairing part of the garden wall, and in
an evil moment borrowed some of the mortar while the man was gone to his dinner. He had just
set it down near the mount when Collet came to call the children to their own dinner. The bucket
remained there, and Lady Ebba's old gray cat, chasing a hound she had discovered near the hole
where her kittens were secreted, bounced off a wall and fell into the mortar--fortunately hind
feet foremost. The indignant Jehan came searching for his bucket and kicked the pile of stones
in all directions, Lady Ebba made stern inquiry into the misfortune which had come to her cat,
and wall-building was abandoned.

For a week or more, Roger gardened, fished and practiced archery in a somewhat subdued fashion.
Lady Philippa, watching Eleanor's brown head and the boy's tousled tow-colored mop, as they
consulted over a boat Roger was making, smiled and sighed. She wished that Alazais were there
to see them play together.

Not long after the disastrous building incident Sir Walter appeared one day with surprising
news indeed. Sir Stephen Giffard, the elder brother, was about to marry and come to live in
the old Norman chateau. The new chatelaine was a rich widow of Louvain. Sir Stephen and Lady
Adelicia would be the lord and lady of the castle, and would have the tapestry chamber.

"Oh, moth-er!" cried Eleanor piteously. No other room in the castle would ever be so pleasant.
She could not understand her mother's untroubled acceptance of the change.

"But my dear child," Lady Philippa went on, "we shall not be here; we are going away. King
Henry has given your father a great estate in a wild country in the west of England, and he
is building a castle for our home. You will be an English maiden, sweetheart, and have your
tapestry of Saint George for your very own room."

Eleanor's eyes were starlike. Then her mouth began to droop a little. "Is Roger to stay here?"

"Roger will be with us. His father's castle is only a few leagues from ours, and he is going
to leave Roger at our home for a year or more while he is away."

This made it quite perfect. Roger rejoiced openly at the prospect of going back to England.
In stray moments Eleanor wondered a little how Lady Ebba liked it. She rather doubted whether
Lady Adelicia would be as content there as her mother.

When they rode away from the old Norman gateway for the last time Eleanor laughed gleefully:
"I don't care where we go, mother," she whispered, "we've the roots and seeds from your garden,
and we shall have a tapestry chamber!"

THE CASTLE

 O the Castle of Heart's Delight!
     The winds of the sunrise know it,
 And the music adrift in its airy halls,
     To the end of the world they blow it--
        Music of glad hearts keeping time
        To bells that ring in a crystal chime
        With the cadence light of an ancient rime--
 Such music lives on the winds of night
 That blow from the Castle of Heart's Delight!

 O the Castle of Heart's Delight
     Where you and I go faring--
 Heritage dear of love and toil,
     Guerdon of faith and daring.
        For all may win to the ancient gate,
        Though some are early and some are late,
        And each hath borne with his hidden Fate,--
 For never a man but hath his right
 To enter his Castle of Heart's Delight!

VI

THE FAIRIES' WELL

What a beautiful place this is," Lady Philippa said softly. She was standing with her husband
near the great stone keep, looking out across a half-built wall at the hills and valleys of
his wilderness domain. It was one of those mornings of early summer when the air is cool yet
bright with sunshine, and the unfolding beauty of the world has something of heaven in it.
Birds were singing everywhere, and the green of new leaves clothed the land in elvish loveliness.
"Your England is very fair, Gualtier."

"It is good that you find it so, love," answered the knight. He had had misgivings a-plenty
in bringing his gently-bred Provencal wife to this rough country. Often he had to be absent
from dawn to moonrise, riding on some perilous expedition. He and his little force of men-at-arms
and yeomen were doing police work on the Welsh border, and no one ever knew just when the turbulent
chiefs of those mountains would attempt a raid.

Lady Philippa never complained. She ruled her household as he ruled his lands, wisely and well.
She called her husband Gualtier instead of Walter, because he liked it, and sang to her lute
the canzons and retronsas of her country, but she seemed to love his England as he did. She
talked to the woodcutters' wives and the village women and farm people as if she had played
in childhood about their doors. In fact the knight had a shrewd notion that if he had been
a bachelor the taming of his half-British, half-Saxon peasantry would have been far less easy.

He had not wished to dominate and overawe the people, but to win them to true loyalty. He had
known exactly what he wanted when he selected the place for his castle, and a man who knows
his own mind can usually find men to do his work.

A castle in that place and time was a little town in itself, and it must be able to exist by
itself when necessary, without markets or factories or outside help of any kind. Like most
Normans the knight was a born builder, and had taken care to make his castle as proof against
attack, and as scientifically built, as castle could be. Each landowner had to be his own architect.
Certain general rules were followed, of course. The keep, the fosse, the inner and outer bailey,
the general construction, were much the same in all fortresses of Normandy or Norman Britain.
But no two sites were alike, and the work had to be planned not only according to the shape
of the hill but with reference to the material to be had, the amount and quality of labor at
hand, and the climate. This castle was on a hill not high originally, but made some fifty feet
higher by heaping up earth and stone to bring the whole top somewhere near the level of the
huge rock on which the keep was built. On that side the river flowed almost under the precipitous
western face of the mount, so that a stone could be dropped from the battlements into the water.
The young page, Roger, thought he could fish from his window if he could get a line long enough.
The keep was still the living-place of the family, but the double line of stone wall encircling
the mount was finished, and at exposed points small watch- towers were placed, known as the
mill-tower, the armorer's tower, the smith's tower or the salt-tower, according to their use.
If the castle should be attacked each one of these outworks would be the post of a small garrison
and stubbornly defended, while the keep could be held almost indefinitely. The deep cellars
would hold grain and salt meat enough for months, and there was a spring within the walls.
Even the narrow windows were so shaped that an arrow aimed at one of them would almost certainly
strike the cunningly-sloped side and rebound, instead of entering the building. The gate was
of massive timbers held together by heavy iron hinges and studded with nails, and above it
was a projecting stone gallery connecting the two gateway towers. This gallery was machicolated,
or built with a series of openings in the floor, through which the defenders could shoot arrows
upon the besiegers, or pour boiling pitch down upon them. This was a Saracen contrivance, and
had been suggested and supervised by Sir Hugh l'Estrange, who had seen the like in Spain.

There was one place where all plans had gone wrong, and that was a part of the wall near the
keep, almost under the windows of the well-chamber. It had been built three times, and always,
before it was done, the stones would begin to slip and sink. Yesterday a section of wall had
gone clean over into the river and carried a mason with it. Fortunately he could swim, and
though nobody thought he would come out alive, he had scrambled up the bank very cold, somewhat
bruised, and sputtering like a wet cat.

That brought the matter to a crisis. There were uneasy whispers of a curse on the mount, a
tradition that no castle built there would ever be finished, an old custom of sacrificing some
human being to be buried under the foundation of a castle for the pacifying of the ancient
gods. And all of this uncanny terror was somehow connected with a hill some distance away toward
the forest-clad mountains, where a low brown-tiled cottage crouched like a toad, under a poplar
whose leaves were ever twinkling in the sun.

"Gualtier," queried Lady Philippa, her eye following his, "what is it about old Mother Izan?
The maids have been telling all sorts of foolish tales about her enchantments. What has she
been doing?"

The knight laughed, but not very mirthfully. "Nothing whatever, in my opinion. But I may as
well tell you--they say that she has overlooked the mount so that we shall never be able to
finish this corner of the wall. It is vexatious, because I meant that nook for your garden.
It is the only place that is sheltered from the wind and at the same time has sunshine and
a good outlook. But the wall has thrice been all but finished, and each time the stones have
begun to sink and topple. This time Howel the mason was nearly killed. Of course, a feeble
bent old woman who can hardly hobble ten rods cannot have undermined a wall at this distance.
That is absurd. But the panic the men have got into is not. That wall will have to be finished--somehow."

Lady Philippa looked at the tumbled masses of stone. "It would be a charming place for roses,"
she mused, and looked again at the cottage, where beside the door a gleam of water caught the
light. "That is the spring they call the Fairies' Well."

"Yes; it is one of the oldest wells in this part of England. The water is pure as the sunlight,
and never fails. Hugh thinks it may be one of the places the heathen priests held sacred. It
is not so very long since the people worshiped pagan gods."

The lady traced a pattern in the dust with the point of her slender shoe. "I think," she said,
"that I will take the children and ride over to see Mother Izan."

The knight made no objection, for the country was quiet, and he could see the party from the
castle mount as they set forth, Lady Philippa on her black Arabian jennet, Eleanor and Roger
on their forest ponies.

The children had had their own discussion about that wall the day before, and returned to it
as they rode along the trail that led to Mother Izan's cottage. It was a longer way than it
seemed from the height, for a marsh full of tall reeds almost encircled the hill on which the
Fairies' Well was, and the trail kept to the high moorland above.

"I do wonder what is the matter with the wall," mused Eleanor. "Do you suppose it can be bewitched,
Roger?"

"Maybe," Roger admitted. "But if Mother Izan can't keep her cow out of the bog I don't see
how she could pull down a stone wall. It's like the story of Dinas Emrys father told me," he
added with relish. "King Vortigern was building a castle on Snowdon, and every night whatever
they had built in the daytime fell down. After awhile they sent for old Merlin to see what
the matter was. And it was two great serpents in a pool away down under the foundation. One
was white and one was red, and they fought all the time. First the white one had the best of
it, but the red one beat him at last, and chased him out of the pool. Merlin told them that
the red serpent meant the British and the white serpent the Saxons, and the British would drive
the Saxons out. But they haven't done it yet."

This was deliciously horrible. "You don't suppose there are snakes under our castle, do you,
Roger?"

"Of course not," said Roger, pulling in his lively pony. "That was nothing but a tale. I wish
I could bore a hole into the cliff, and see."

"Collet says Mother Izan is a witch," said Eleanor, abandoning the subject of snakes. "She
hated it, when mother used some of her herb drinks last year."

"I like Mother Izan," said Roger sturdily. "She cured my leg once, when a stone fell on it--long
before you came, when I was a little fellow." Roger was not quite ten. "She knows more about
plants and animals than anybody. Ruric let her doctor his dog, the big one he calls Cuchullin."

"Collet doesn't like Ruric either," said Eleanor.

"She doesn't like anybody here really, except mother and me. I never mind very much about what
she says. There's Mother Izan in the doorway,--and oh, what has she got hanging up in the big
tree?"

The old woman was a queer bent creature with greenish eyes like a cat's, and white unruly hair
that would not stay under her coif. In fact she looked not unlike a gaunt, grim old puss who
had all her life fought what crossed her path, from snakes to staghounds. She was so old that
the village people could not remember when she had been young, and her grandsons were elderly men.

A wicker basket hung from the lowest branch of the poplar tree. In it, cradled in close fine-woven
osiers with a lining of rabbitskin, lay a solemn black-eyed baby, looking almost as old as
the old woman herself.

"It's like a changeling," thought Eleanor, looking with fascinated eyes at the weird little
being. Lady Philippa smiled, and laid her hand softly on the furry black head. "This is an
unusual sight in your cottage," she said. "Whence came it, Goody?"

"Tis none of mine," old Izan grumbled, "'tis the brat of a scatter-brained woman--Kate, wife
to Howel the mason. She came screeching at me saying the babe was a changeling I had left in
place of her child of two years, and I should care for it. I have no mind for the tending of
babes at my time of life, but I could not let the creature starve. Natheless 'tis but ill fed,
for my cow was lost in the marsh, and none will let me have milk for it. Kate she's dead of
a fever, and Howel will have naught of the young one, so I have made shift as I could, with
bread soaked in herb drink."

Lady Philippa was twisting a vine-garland into a leafy canopy to keep the sun from the baby's
eyes. "'Tis a pretty baby," she said, "though so small. The cow that was lost in the marsh--how
did that happen?"

The old woman's eyes blazed with hatred. "My lady, the lads of the village drove her there,
and the poor hunted beast floundered into a quagmire. I cursed them well for it, but that does
not bring back the good cow. And Howel will do nothing for me because the child is so weazened
and so small."

The lady frowned. "It is all wrong," she said, "the lads' cruelty and the cursing of them and
the blame of the woman who thought you had witched her child. Sir Walter shall send you a goat
that you can tether within sight of the cottage. In my country the folk often feed their babes
on goat's milk, and I would like well to taste goat's milk cheese again. Is Howel at work now?"

"He was, my lady, but since he fell into the water he swears that he will work no more on the
wall."

Lady Philippa spoke but with winsome frankness,--"The men say, good mother, that the wall is
witch-ridden because it has fallen thrice. They are afraid, that is why they do not reason.
Surely in God's world we should be safe from such evil, if we serve Him. Perhaps if the baby
grows fat and merry, Howel will be kinder. Has it been christened yet?"

"Nay--what have we to do with such gear? But my lady--heard ye never the old rhyme--

 "'Overlook the Fairies' Well--
   None did that since Adam fell;
   Overlook the Fairies' Hill--
   Then Old Nick shall have his fill.'"

"That has naught to do with our castle," said the lady wonderingly. "Look- -the keep is no
higher than your roof-tree. My lord chose not the site for its loftiness but for the sure foundation."

"Aye," chuckled the old woman, "you say well, 'tis a good foundation. All but that corner.
Tell your lord to raise no towers on that corner."

"I am sorry the wall has given so much trouble," Lady Philippa said regretfully, "for that
is the only place for my garden--my roses and violets and herbs. My lord will try once more
to finish it. If I might have but that piece of garden it would be like a bit of my old home,
and that is a dear treasure, Mother Izan, in a foreign land."

Her voice trembled as she spoke, and Eleanor pressed close to her mother's side and held her
hand. She had never heard a word before about her mother's longing for Provence.

As the three rode away old Izan stood for a long time, shading her eyes and gazing after them.
Next morning a village boy in charge of Roger came up the path to her door, leading two bleating
bewildered goats, which were securely fastened to a stake to graze at will.

"I came myself," said Roger loftily, "because I meant to make sure that it was all right. I
haven't forgotten the time you cured my leg, Mother Izan, and neither has father. Have those
blue-tit eggs hatched yet?"

The old woman's brown withered face crinkled in a smile. "Trust you, Master Roger!" she muttered.
"Come still."

She hobbled around to the rear of the cottage and paused to draw aside a branch. Roger cautiously
peered through the leaves, and a hiss like that of an angry snake sounded within.

"If I didn't know it was a bird I should think there was a snake or a cross cat in there,"
said Roger, after he had had a look at the small but spirited bird-mother. "What ever makes
her do that, Mother Izan?"

Old Izan put out a gnarled hand to feed the titmouse a few live insects. "Same as an old woman
don't mind folk saying she's a witch so they let her alone, mayhap," she said. "You'd not reach
your hand in there if 'twas an adder's nest, I reckon."

"I'm teaching Eleanor all the birds' names," went on Roger, quite at his ease, munching a bit
of flag-root. "They don't have the same names here that they do in Normandy, you know. Old
Jehan--the gardener that used to know Eleanor's grandfather--taught me all their names when
I was there. The nuthatch is Pic Macon, and the mum-ruffin is Pendolin, and the robin is Marie-Godrie.
I'm going to show Eleanor the nest next time we come, if you don't mind."

To the surprise of everybody old Izan rode up the castle mount one day on a borrowed donkey.
"Howel he loaned it to me," she explained dryly. "Seems like he has less fear of witches since
little Gwillym began to fat up. I have secret things to speak of to my lord, Master Roger.
Will 'ee take him word?"

In private, with only Sir Walter and Lady Philippa to hear, the old woman told her secret.

"'Tis the Fairies' Well that drags down your wall," said she. "My grandfather told me the tale,
and he had it from his father. The outlet is a hidden stream that runs underground to the river,
and not the stream in the marsh as folk think. The underground channel goes under a corner
of your mount. When the snows melt and the waters are strong in mountain and in valley, then
rises the water in this channel, deep under the mount, and heaves at the rocks above it and
throws down your wall. That is all the witchcraft of it. So long as 'twas your stones and battlements
that fell I cared no whit, but when my lady told me that she would have her garden there I
could not bear to think of the peril for her and the younkets. I am no witch, my lord, unless
it be Satan that gives us to know more than others. But I have hated the Normans who came here
to steal our land, and have helped my people to harass them in years gone by. All but you and
Sir Hugh l'Estrange, they have despoiled and plagued the folk. But build no wall above the
stream, for 'twill fall--'twill fall--'twill fall. The waters will pull it down."

The knight sat thinking, his hands on the arms of his tall carved chair. "I am not so sure,"
he said. "Maybe we can lift the curse on the mount and make the wall secure. You shall dwell
in peace by your well so long as you may live, and your children after you, if you will show
me where this channel goes and keep the secret. Tis in my mind that it is best to keep it secret
still."

The old woman looked up with bright inquiring eyes.

"See you," the knight went on, "if we dig a channel to let the waters run to the river by a
shorter swifter way there will be no more trouble. I think that we will make an excuse of draining
the marsh. Then if we can, when the underground way is no more the channel of the stream, we
will wall it in to make a secret passage from the castle in time of need. You have kept the
secret so long that I may trust it with you--and there will be no more talk of the powers of
evil taking toll of my people."

Sir Walter rose and went his way, and in due time consulted with his head mason about the canal
to the river. But Lady Philippa came and took both old Izan's work-hard hands in hers, and
thanked her, with tears in her eyes. Thereafter no more masonry fell above the hidden waters,
and the cottage by the Fairies' Well was left in peace.

LULLABY OF THE PICT MOTHER

 Hush thee, my baby O! never thee cry,
 Cradled in wicker, safe nested so high.
 Never gray wolf nor green dragon come near,--
 Tree-folk in summer have nothing to fear.

   Hee-o, wee-o, hear the wild bees hummin',
   See the blackcock by the burnie drummin',--
   Wattle-weaving sit we snug and couthie,--
   Hee-o, wee-o, birdling in our boothie!

 Hush thee, my baby O! dark is the night--
 Cuddle by kiln-ring where fire burns bright.
 Trampling our turf-roof wild cattle we hear--
 Cave-folk in winter have nothing to fear.

   Kling-klang, ding-dong, hear the hammers clinking--
   Stone pots, iron kettles, copper cups for drinkin'!
   Elf-shots for bowmen plough a mighty furrow--
   Hee-o, wee-o, foxling in our burrow!

 Hush thee, my baby! The Beltane's aglow,
 Making the deasil the wiseacres go.
 Brewing our heather-wine, dancing in round--
 Earth-folk are we, by her spells are we bound.

   Hee-o, wee-o, hear the pipes a-croonin',
   Like the dragon's beetle-wings a-droonin',
   Dyeea guard us from the Sword-man's quellin',--
   Hee-o, wee-o, bairnie in our dwellin'!

 Hush thee, my baby O! hear the dogs bark,
 Herdin' the lammies home out o' the dark.
 Cradled and christened frae goblin's despite,
 House-folk we hear the kirk bells through the night.

   Hee-o, wee-o! hear the cricket chirrin',
   Hear auld Bawthrens by the ingle purrin',--
   Christ us keep while daddie's gone a-huntin'!
   Hee-o, wee-o, bonnie Babie Buntin'!

 The winds and the waters our Father shall praise,
 The birds, beasts and fishes shall tell o' His ways.
 By seashore and mountain, by forest and ling,
 O come all ye people, and praise ye our King!

VII

THE WOLVES OF OSSORY

Philosophers generally incline to the opinion that the werewolf has no tail. Therefore, this
being the sign--"

"Nennius positively states that in certain Irish families, the power to change at will into
a wolf--"

"And who knows how numerous may be these abominable wizards?"

Padraig, the scribe, sat listening intently while the company around the guest-house fire discoursed
in monk-Latin of werewolves in Ireland. "In saecula saeculorum"--"ab incunabilis horrendum"--"quocunque
nomine notandum"--"coram diabolo"--the sonorous many-syllabled phrases clattered like the noise
of rooks in treetops. It was January, the "wolf-month" of old English shepherds. Meadows ran
floods of icy half-melted snow; mountain winds were screaming about the cloisters, and for
two days travelers had been weather-bound at the Abbey.

Some time before, there had been rumors of wolves infesting the hills and displaying in their
forays an all but human boldness and cunning. Then other tales began to be whispered. The peasantry
huddled early about their turf-fires, and the shepherds of the Abbey sought counsel from their
superior. They got small comfort from the Abbot, who curtly ordered them to attend to their
duty and avoid vain babblings.

All the same, among the manuscript volumes in the nest-egg of a library the monks possessed,
there were chronicles that mentioned the werewolf. Marie de France in her "Lays" included the
Breton romance of Bisclaveret, the loup-garou. The nerves of the weaker ones began to play
them tricks. It was less and less easy to keep unbroken the orderly round of monastic life.

This little religious community, toiling earnestly and faithfully under wise direction, might
in time bring some comfort and prosperity into a desolate land. Ireland had once been known
as the Isle of Saints. Now, despoiled by warring kings, pagan Danes and finally the Norman
adventurers under Strongbow, the people were in some districts hardly more than heathen. This
Abbey, set by Henry Plantagenet in a remote valley, was like a fort on the frontier of Christendom.
The people were sullen, suspicious, ignorant, and piteously poor. To deal with them demanded
all that a man had of courage, faith and wisdom. And now came these rumors of men-wolves.

When the floods had gone down and the guests departed, Brother Basil in the scriptorium found
Padraig diligently at work on a new design for the border of the manuscript he was illuminating.
The central figure was that of a wolf crouching under a thorn-bush to slip out of the shaggy
skin which disguised his human form. Under his feet lay a child unconscious. At a distance
could be seen the distracted mother, and other wolves pursued terrified people flying to shelter.
Once, before he came to the Abbey, Padraig had been chased by wolves, and had spent the night
in a tree. He drew his wolf with a lifelike accuracy, inspired by the memory of those long,
cold hours under a winter moon.

Instead of pausing with a word of criticism or suggestion, as usual, Brother Basil took up
the drawing and put it in his scrip. All that he said was, "Find another design, Padraig, my son."

To others Padraig might seem an unruly spirit, neither to command nor to coax, but the word
of Brother Basil was his law and his gospel. He began to draw new figures on fresh parchment,
but he could not quite put out of his mind the unlooked-for fate of his wolf. Current gossip
often gave hints for the work of the illuminators, and he knew the work had been good.

It was plain enough that Brother Basil was in one of his absent-minded fits. There was no beguiling
him into talk at such times. If any of those under his direction presumed upon his mood to
do careless or ill-judged work, they found his eye as keen and his word as ready as usual.
But his mind--his real self--was not there. Padraig wondered whether this could have any connection
with the unlucky picture.

Next day there was deeper concern in the scriptorium. Brother Basil was not present at all.
The work went on under Brother Mark, the librarian, but the heart of it was not the same. The
untiring patience, brilliant imagination and high ideals of the man who was not only their
master but their friend, had made him the soul of the little group of artists. He could not
be away for a morning without every one feeling the difference. At times he had gone afield
for a day or even longer, searching for balsams, pigments, minerals and other things needed
for the work, but he had nearly always taken Padraig with him. This time he had gone alone.

Padraig was as curious as a squirrel and as determined as a mink, and he wished very much to
know what this meant. He did not exactly believe the werewolf story, although it had so impressed
him that he could not help making the picture; but he did not like to think of it in connection
with the mysterious absence of Brother Basil. A priest of the Church might be able to defy
a loup-garou, but if the wolves were real ones they might not know him from any ordinary man.

There is no land so full of fairy-lore and half-forgotten legends as Ireland. Princes in their
painted halls and slaves in their mud cabins listened to the shanachies or wandering story-tellers,
with wonder, terror and delight. Cluricaunes, banshees, giants, witches, monsters, pookas and
the little red-capped people of the fairy rings, were known to the dwellers in many a wattled
hut where Padraig had slept. Old people who spoke no language but their own luminous Irish
winged his young imagination with tales far more marvelous than those of Nennius, the monk
of Bangor.

Still, Padraig had never himself seen any of these extraordinary beings. He also suspected
that Brother Basil would not vouch for the truth of everything in the Latin books he taught
his pupils how to read.

Days passed, and Brother Basil had not returned. The uneasiness among the monks was growing.
It was said that the Abbot himself was as much in the dark as they were. Padraig had just made
up his mind that he could endure it no longer, when the Abbot sent for him.

It had been decided, Padraig learned, that he, as Brother Basil's wonted companion on such
excursions, would have the best chance of finding him now. All that any one knew was that he
had gone out of the great gate one morning early, and no one had seen him since.

"Nobody would," said Padraig, "if he went straight north into the hills. No one lives near
the old road through the forest."

It was in that direction that all the wolf-tracks had led from the sheep- fold, and the country
was a wilderness of marsh and mountain. The Abbot looked at the boy keenly, kindly.

"Are you willing to go alone?" he asked.

"It is the best way," Padraig replied quickly. "One can get on faster,-- and there are not
many here who can climb like him. I think he must have met with an accident far from any dwelling."

"He is well beloved by the people. If any one had found him we should have heard. And you have
no fear?"

Padraig hesitated. "There are many frightful things in the world," he said slowly. "Long ago
I knew that if I let myself fear, fear would be my master all the days of my life. But I am
not like the others. I am his dog. I will find him if I live."

"Go, my son, and God be with you," said the Abbot solemnly. And Padraig went.

He took three days' provision in a leathern bag, and a pike such as the countrymen used, and
headed straight toward the hills. He knew that copper was to be found in some parts of the
range, but why Brother Basil should go there alone, particularly just at this time, Padraig
could not see.

He trotted over the slopes of tilled land near the Abbey, forded the river, circled a pond,
and crossed a bog by froglike leaps from hassock to hassock. In time he came to the base of
a steep rocky height, almost a precipice. On the left was a black mud-hole; to the right were
craggy masses of rock. A long slanting break in the cliff led upward to the left. He thrust
his staff in this and began to climb.

Thus far there was no choice, for this was the only direction Brother Basil could have taken
without some one having seen him on the way. From the height it might be possible to make observations.

Only a gossoon of the hills could have gone up the face of the rock as Padraig did, and he
presently found himself on a ledge about twenty feet up, above the quagmire. It was less than
a foot wide at first, but widened toward the left, and seedling trees had formed a growth which
appeared to merge into the densely wooded hill beyond. He pushed his way along this insecure
foothold until the trees began to thin as if there were an open space beyond. Then directly
in front of him sounded the unmistakable snarl of a wolf.

There was no time to think. He braced himself against the cliff, and grasping his pike, awaited
the assault of the beast. Either he or the wolf, or both together, would be tumbled into the
slough. But there followed only a guttural word of command in Irish. Then a voice that he knew
called, "Padraig, my son, is that you?"

Nothing in heaven or earth could have stopped Padraig then. He broke through the thicket into
the clearing, and halted, breathless and amazed.

Brother Basil, unharmed and serene, sat upon a rude wooden bench at the entrance of a cave,
and around him were gathered wolves and wolf-like human beings clad in wolf-pelts. One, who
seemed the leader, stood erect, broad-shouldered and muscular, in a mantle made of the hide
of a giant wolf, the head shaped into a helmet to be drawn mask-like down over the face. A
fire smoldered in the cave's black throat, and meat--mutton-bones- -roasted on a sharpened
stake thrust into a crevice of the rock. An old woman, wasted and wrinkled, wrapped in a yellow-gray
wolfskin lined with lamb's wool, lay on a pile of leaves near the fire, and savage heads emerging
from the undergrowth might have been those of wolves, or of men in the guise of wolves.

In the craziest legends of the chronicles there was no such scene as this. For one whirling
moment Padraig believed everything he had heard or read of werewolf or of loup-garou. In the
name of Saint Kevin, what could this be but the very lair of the beast? Yet Brother Basil showed
neither fear nor aversion. Padraig knelt to kiss the outheld hand.

"Father," he faltered, "they sent me to find you."

"It is well that you have come," the monk answered with his untroubled smile, "you and no one
else. I stumbled upon this place,--really stumbled, for a stone rolled under my foot,--and
here I had to stay until this troublesome lame knee would permit me to walk."

"That is not the whole of it," growled the leader of the wolf-people. "Our dogs winded him,
and had he been like any other monk who ever told beads he would have been pulled down. But
he spoke to them in our own tongue, and my mother, hearing his voice, would have him come to
her, for she had seen no priest for many years. When he heard our story he said that he would
be our friend. And so he would, I believe, had we been what the foolish have thought us."

"Then," stammered Padraig, "it is not true that--that--"

"That the loup-garou is abroad in the land?" finished Brother Basil with delicate scorn. "No.
Wolves are wolves, and men are men,--and some men are thieves."

"He means," snapped the wolf-man, "that one of your own stewards opened the gates to us, using
our tracks to hide his own."

Padraig grinned knowingly. "Simon," he said. "Simon."

"Even so," said Brother Basil.

"He was very zealous about those wolves," said Padraig, reflectively, "especially about using
spiritual weapons and not slings and spears against them. But how--"

"It was the thieving of young lambs of the choicest breed that set the shepherds to thinking
there must be more than wolves abroad," the wolf- leader went on. "But for your Simon, with
his long tongue, they might have driven us away, for Abbot Cuthbert is no coward, nor has he
patience with cowards. But Simon came upon us one night, when we had broken into the sheep-fold
and were making off, and he was not too frightened to choose for himself out of what was left.
Then when we came again he gave us the meat we came for, taking certain fine fleeces and lambskins
for himself. We stole as the wild creatures do, for food; we have no use for parchments or
carded wool. We killed as they kill, to fend off our enemies. The Danish sea-wolves and the
armored wild beasts of Strongbow and de Lacy hunted us as if we were wolves indeed. What could
we do but hunt as the wolves hunt, snatch our meat where we could, hide like foxes in the holes
of the mountain, make ourselves dreaded that we might live, and not die? The Normans brought
to Dermot MacMurragh two hundred heads of the men of Ossory for his delight. All my mother's
children were killed by them save only myself. Well for you that you are no Norman, young clerk
with the red head, or not the word of a hundred priests had saved you."

"And sooner or later the Norman cross-bows would find you, even as they search out hart or
heron," interposed Brother Basil sternly. "I have warned you, Ruric, that this harrying and
plundering must cease. Turn from your wickedness and bear yourselves hereafter as Christian
men, and your souls shall live. And because ye were sorely tried, with God's help a way may
he opened for you to escape your enemies.

"Padraig, you see here a remnant of the men of Ossory, whom the Normans drove into the inhospitable
haunts of the forest. The quarry of that evil hunting ran wild like the dogs who followed their
masters. As the country grew more settled, these half-bred wolf-hounds found out the sheepfolds,
and led their masters to the spoil."

"Even a Norman gives the road to the werewolf," said the Ossorian with a harsh laugh. "The
mercy they deny to man or wolf, they granted us when they thought us neither man nor wolf.
Aye, we chased them roaring to the very gates of their castles. Had our own people known the
truth some of them might have betrayed us, being very poor. Therefore, we made it easiest for
them to keep within doors after nightfall, and in this the priests and monks were of great
help. Until you, Father, came to seek us out, believing that God had thought even for a man
who had lost his human birthright, none hunted or hindered us. We were the masters, being without
hope and without fear of God or man."

"Peace, my son," said Brother Basil gently. "Padraig, you will go to the Abbot and tell him
what you have seen, and ask him of his charity to reveal nothing until I return. I would send
him a letter, had I not lost my scrip with my tablets in my encounter with the dogs. Things
being as they were, it would not have been safe to send any of Ruric's folk with a message."

"No,--not with Simon watching the gate," agreed Padraig, cheerfully. "I wonder does he know
how many lies he has told in this matter?"

"He will have enough to do in accounting to the Abbot for those that are known," said Brother
Basil with a certain edge to his voice that Padraig knew well. "I think, however, that he really
believes he has had dealings with the werewolf. There are men who would run, shaking with terror,
to pledge their souls to the foul fiend if they saw their profit in it. If he knew the truth
he could sell his knowledge easily, and I am not disposed to undeceive him now. Since Ruric
gave me his promise to end this evil I have thought much of the matter, and I believe that
the Abbot will approve my plan. Let him send men with a hurdle to the foot of the cliff to-
morrow. No one need be told more than that I am lame through an accident."

"Some of them will look foolish when they hear that," Padraig observed with satisfaction. "I
grieve for your lameness, Father, and yet I could leap and sing all the way home for joy that
it is not as we feared."

"There would be naught to laugh at if any other man had found us out, I warrant you," Ruric
said gruffly. "The Father won my promise from me by his gentle and comforting words to my old
mother in her distress, for she feared to die, knowing how we had lived. I had not thought
there could be such fearless faith and kindness in any man. Say to your Abbot moreover that
if he, or you, or any of your folk play us false they will find that a werewolf can hunt down
anything that runs."

"If I deceived ye," Padraig answered gravely, "I would throw myself straightway into the river
to cheat your vengeance." As he tightened the straps of his sandals he looked once more at
the strange and savage assembly. There were some thirty men and women and several half-grown
youngsters, garbed in wolfskins so shaped as to leave them free to run or climb. Shoes were
skilfully fashioned like a great wolf-paw; skins were joined so cunningly that when the wearer
loped along a hillside in the chill pale gold of the winter sunset, or skulked among the shadows
of summer woods, any one would swear that what he saw was a lurking wolf. The wolf-mask with
its long muzzle and furry ears concealed the face, the unshorn beards and hair mingled with
the shaggy shoulder-fur of the tunics. A shepherd looking for missing lambs would find only
wolf-tracks to guide him. Traps had been sprung or smashed, storehouses rifled, watchdogs killed.
Even the hard-headed and harder-hearted Norman huntsmen turned back one day, when they discovered
their hounds baying at the foot of a tree.

Padraig knew all about the slaughter done by Dermot MacMurragh and his Norman allies, up and
down Ossory. Fierce in their despair, vengeful in their cunning, these refugees had run wild
like their dogs. The huge untamed brutes were stronger than collies and wiser than wolves,
and nothing could have kept them from raiding any sheepfold that they scented.

The Abbot heard Padraig's story through without comment, his eyes blazing under their shaggy
brows. If any one but Brother Basil had asked him to stay his hand, he would not have given
two thoughts to it, but it was Brother Basil, and the matter must be considered.

"These men," he said grimly, "are outlaws, red-handed robbers. They have broken the law of
God and man. They deserve justice, not mercy."

"If they can be caught," ventured Padraig.

"You think they cannot be taken?"

Padraig shook his head. "I stood as near them as I am to you, and I did not see them until
they wished to be seen. They run like foxes and climb like cats. They will be killed or kill
themselves, every man and woman of them, rather than be taken. Were it not better they should
live like christened souls than be hunted like beasts?"

The Abbot rose and began to pace the floor. "Go, my son," he said not unkindly, "and send Simon,
the steward, to me."

But Simon was not to be found. Brother Mark, the librarian, being of a distrustful disposition,
had been asking many questions of late regarding the parchments prepared for the scriptorium.
Simon had perhaps taken fright. He had not returned, in any case, from the nearest market-town,
whither he had gone that morning. When it was found that everything upon which he could lay
his hands had gone with him, some of the brethren were inclined to think the whole werewolf
panic an invention of the steward's to hide his thieving. Padraig went to the foot of the cliff,
accompanied by two men with a hurdle, and found Brother Basil safe and in good spirits, but
neither wolf, wolfling nor wolf-man was to be seen. Not so much as the sound of a wolf's howling
was heard about the sheep-folds, and shepherds and sheep-dogs tended the lambs that spring
undisturbed. There were those who said that the werewolves had been driven away by the prayers
of Brother Basil when he visited the forest. After awhile a legend grew up and was told to
the Welsh clerk Giraldus, about a werewolf who met a priest in the forest and begged him to
give Christian aid and comfort to his dying mate. The story goes that the priest remained all
night conversing with the unfortunate man, who behaved rather as a man than as a wolf.

When spring stirred the travel on the Irish roads a party of forest folk appeared one day at
the Abbey and asked for baptism. Their children had, it appeared, grown up in the wilderness
without knowledge of religion. Such things were not unheard of in those days, and after baptism
the party went down to the seaport and took ship for England, where they lived for some years
in the service of a Norman knight, Hugh l'Estrange. When finally a sort of peace was patched
up in Ireland between the Normans and the Irish chiefs, Ruric and his folk returned. But no
more was heard of the wolves of Ossory.

 ST. HUGH AND THE BIRDS

 When good Saint Hugh of Lincoln
     Was a boy in Avalon,
 He knew the birds and their houses
     And loved them every one,
 Merle and mavis and grosbeak,
     Gay goshawk, and even the wren,--
 When he took Saint Benedict's service
     It wasn't the least different then! Methods
         of detection depended on both sight and sound.
             Efficient lookout systems on shipboard,
         with men assigned to different sectors
             so as to cover the entire horizon, made it possible frequently to
detect a periscope or torpedo wake in time to change course, bring
guns to bear, and escape destruction.

 According to a British Admiralty
     estimate, in case a submarine
 were sighted the chances of escape
     were seven to three, but
 otherwise only one to four. Aircraft
     of all kinds proved of great value
 in detecting the presence of U-boats,
     as well as in attacking them. Hydrophones
         and other listening devices, though at first
             more highly perfected by the enemy,
         were so developed during the war as to enable
             patrol vessels to discover the presence and even determine the course
and speed of a submerged foe.

Along with these devices, a system of information was organized which,
drawing information from a wide variety of sources, enabled Allied
authorities to trace the cruise of a U-boat, anticipate its arrival
in a given locality, and prophesy the duration of its stay.

 
  Among methods of destruction, the mounting of guns on merchantmen
was chiefly valuable, as already suggested, because of its effect
in forcing submarines to resort to illegal and barbarous methods of
warfare.

Hitherto, submarines had been accustomed to operate an the surface, board vessels, and sink them
by bombs or gunfire. Visit and search, essential in order to avoid injury to neutrals, was now
out of the question, for owing to the surface vulnerability of the submarine it might be sent
to the bottom by a single well-directed shot. In brief, the guns on the merchant ship kept submarines
beneath the surface, forced them to draw upon their limited and costly supply of torpedoes, and
hindered them from securing good position and aim for torpedo attack.

Much depended, of course, upon the range of the ship's guns and the
size and experience of the gun-crews.

When the United States began arming her ships in March, 1917, she was able to put enough trained men
aboard to maintain lookouts and man guns both night and day. A dozen or more exciting duels ensued
between ships and U-boats before the latter learned that such encounters did not repay the risks
involved. On October 19, 1917, the steamer J. L. Luckenbach had a four-hour running battle with
a submarine in which the ship fired 202 rounds and the pursuer 225. The latter scored nine hits,
but was at last driven off by the appearance of a destroyer. To cite another typical engagement,
the Navajo, in the English Channel, July 4, 1917, was attacked first by torpedo and then by
gunfire. The 27th shot from the ship hit the enemy's conning tower and caused two explosions.
"Men who were on deck at the guns and had not jumped overboard ran aft. The submarine canted
forward at an angle of almost 40 degrees, and the propeller could
be plainly seen lashing the air."[1]

[Footnote 1: For more detailed
narratives of this and other episodes of the submarine campaign, see
Ralph D. Payne, THE FIGHTING FLEETS, 1918.]

In coastal waters where
traffic converged, large forces of destroyers and other craft were
employed for purposes of escort, mine sweeping, and patrol.

Yet, save as a means of keeping the enemy under water and guarding merchant ships, these units had
only a limited value owing to the difficulty of making contact with the enemy. During the
later stages of the war destroyers depended chiefly upon the depth
bomb, an invention of the British navy, which by means of the so-called
"Y guns" could be dropped in large numbers around the supposed location
of the enemy.

It was in this way that the United States Destroyers Fanning and Nicholson, while engaged
as convoy escorts, sank the U-58 and captured its crew.

The "mystery" or "Q" ships (well-armed vessels disguised as harmless merchantmen) were of slight
efficacy after submarines gave up surface attack. In fact, it was the submarine itself which,
contrary to all pre-war theories, proved the most effective type of naval craft against its
own kind. Whereas fuel economy compelled German submarines to spend as much time as possible
on the surface, the Allied under-water boats, operating near their bases, could cruise awash
or submerged and were thus able to creep up on the enemy and attack unawares. According to
Admiral Sims, Allied destroyers, about 500 in all, were credited with the certain destruction
of 34 enemy submarines; yachts, patrol craft, etc., over 3000 altogether, sank 31; whereas about
100 Allied submarines sank probably 20.[1] Since 202 submarines were destroyed, this may be an underestimate
of the results accomplished by each type, but it indicates relative efficiency. Submarines
kept the enemy beneath the surface, led him to stay farther away from the coast, and also, owing
to the disastrous consequences that might ensue from mistaken identity, prevented the U-boats from
operating in pairs.

The chief danger encountered by Allied submarines was from friendly surface vessels. On one occasion
an American submarine, the AL-10, approaching a destroyer of the same service, was forced to
dive and was then given a bombardment of depth charges. This bent plates, extinguished lights,
and brought the submarine again to the surface, where fortunately
she was identified in the nick of time.

The two commanders had been roommates at Annapolis.

[Footnote 1: THE VICTORY AT SEA, World's Work, May, 1920, p. 56.]

Work of the United States Navy

Having borne the brunt of the naval war for three years, the British navy welcomed the reënforcements
which the United States was able to contribute, and shared to the utmost the experience already
gained. On May 3, 1917, the first squadron of 6 American destroyers arrived at Queenstown, and
was increased to 50 operating in European waters in November, and 70 at the time of the armistice.
A flotilla of yachts, ill adapted as they were for such service, did hazardous duty as escorts in
the Bay of Biscay; and a score of submarines crossed the Atlantic
during the winter to operate off Ireland and in the Azores.

Five dreadnoughts under Admiral Rodman from the U. S. Atlantic fleet became a part of the Grand
Fleet at Scapa Flow.

Probably the most notable work of the American navy was in projects where American manufacturing
resources and experience in large-scale undertakings could be brought
to bear.

In four months, from July to November, 1917, the United States Navy constructed an oil pipe line from
the west to the east coast of Scotland, thus eliminating the long and dangerous northern circuit.
Five 14-inch naval guns, on railway mountings, with a complete train
of 16 cars for each gun, were equipped by the navy, manned entirely
with naval personnel, and were in action in France from August, 1918,
until the armistice, firing a total of 782 rounds on the German lines
of communication, at ranges up to 30 miles.

The American proposal of a mine barrage across the entrance to the North Sea from Scotland to
Norway at first met with slight approval abroad, so unprecedented was the problem of laying
a mine-field 230 miles in length, from 15 to 30 miles in width, and extending at least 240 feet
downward in waters the total depth of which was 400 or more feet. Even the mine barrier at
the Straits of Dover had proved ineffective owing to heavy tides, currents, and bad bottom
conditions, until it was strengthened by Admiral Keyes in 1918. By employing a large type
of mine perfected by the United States Naval Bureau of Ordnance, it was found possible, however,
to reduce by one-third the number of mines and the amount of wire
needed for the North Sea Barrage.

The task was therefore undertaken, and completed in the summer of 1918. Out of a total of 70,000
mines, 56,570, or about 80 per cent, were planted by American vessels. The barrage when completed
gave an enemy submarine about one chance in ten of getting through. According to reliable records,
it accomplished the destruction or serious injury of 17 German submarines, and by its deterrent
effect, must have practically closed the northern exit to both under-water and surface craft.

The
Attack on Zeebrugge and Ostend

At the Channel exit of the North Sea, a vigorous blow at the German
submarine nests on the Belgian coast was finally struck on April 22-23,
1918, by the Dover Force under Vice Admiral Roger Keyes, in one of
the most brilliant naval operations of the war.

Of the two Belgian ports, Ostend and Zeebrugge, the latter was much more useful to the Germans
because better protected, less exposed to batteries on the land front, and connected by a deeper
canal with the main base 8 miles distant at Bruges. It was planned, however, to attack both ports,
with the specific purpose of sinking 5 obsolete cruisers laden with concrete across the entrances
to the canals.

The operation required extensive reconstruction work on the vessels employed, a thorough course
of training for personnel, suitable conditions of atmosphere, wind, and tide, and execution of
complicated movements in accordance with a time schedule worked out
to the minute.

At Ostend the attack failed owing to a sudden shift of wind which blew the smoke screen laid by
motor boats back upon the two block ships, and so confused their approach that they were stranded
and blown up west of the entrance.

At Zeebrugge, two of the three block ships, the Iphigenia and the Intrepid, got past the heavy
guns on the mole, through the protective nets, and into the canal, where they were sunk athwart
the channel by the explosion of mines laid all along their keels. To facilitate their entrance,
the cruiser Vindictive (Commander Alfred Carpenter), fitted with a false deck and 18 brows or gangways
for landing forces, had been brought up 25 minutes earlier--to be exact, at a minute past midnight--along
the outer side of the high mole or breakwater enclosing the harbor. Here, in spite of a heavy
swell and tide, she was held in position by the ex-ferryboat Daffodill, while some 300 or 400
bluejackets and marines swarmed ashore under a violent fire from batteries and machine guns and
did considerable injury to the works on the mole. Fifteen minutes later, an old British submarine
was run into a viaduct connecting the mole with the shore and there
blown up, breaking a big gap in the viaduct.

Strange to say, the Vindictive and her auxiliaries, after lying more than an hour in this dangerous
position, succeeded in taking aboard all survivors from the landing party and getting safely
away. Motor launches also rescued the crews of the blockships and
the men--all of them wounded--from the submarine.

One British destroyer and two motor boats were sunk, and the casualties were 176 killed, 412
wounded, and 49 missing.

For a considerable period thereafter, all the larger German torpedo craft remained cooped
up at Bruges, and the Zeebrugge blockships still obstructed the channel at the end of the
war.

The Convoy System

Of all the anti-submarine measures employed, prior to the North Sea Barrage and the Zeebrugge
attack, the adoption of the convoy system was undoubtedly the most effective in checking the
loss of tonnage at the height of the submarine campaign. Familiar as a means of commerce protection
in previous naval wars, the late adoption of the convoy system in
the World War occasioned very general surprise.

It was felt by naval authorities, however, that great delay would be incurred in assembling
vessels, and in restricting the speed of all ships of a convoy to that of the slowest unit.
Merchant captains believed themselves unequal to the task of keeping station at night in close
order, with all lights out and frequent changes of course, and they thought that the resultant
injuries would be almost as great as from submarines.

Furthermore, so long as a large number of neutral vessels were at sea, it appeared a very doubtful
expedient to segregate merchant vessels of belligerent nationality and thus distinguish them
as legitimate prey.

But in April, 1917, the situation was indeed desperate. The losses had become so heavy that
of every 100 ships leaving England it was estimated that 25 never
returned.[1] The American commander in European waters, Admiral Sims,
reports Admiral Jellicoe as saying at this time, "They will win unless
we can stop these losses--and stop them soon."[2] Definitely adopted
in May following, the convoy system was in general operation before
the end of the summer, with a notable decline of sinkings in both
the Mediterranean and the Atlantic.

The following table, based on figures from the Naval Annual for 1919, indicates the number of
vessels sunk for each submarine destroyed. It shows the decreased effectiveness of submarine
operations after September 1, 1917, which is taken as the date when the convoy system had come
into full use, and brings out the crescendo of losses in 1917.

[Footnote 1: Brassey's NAVAL ANNUAL, 1919.]

[Footnote 2: World's Work, Sept., 1919.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------- |Vessels sunk| |
| per | Total No. | | submarine | sunk | | destroyed | | --------------|------------|-----------|---------------------------------
Aug. 1, 1914- | 10.4 | |69 ships sunk, almost entirely by Feb., 1915 | | | surface cruisers. |
| | Feb. 1, 1915- | 48 | 544 |Half by torpedo; 148 without Feb. 1,
1917 | |(two years)| warning; 3,066 lives lost.

| | | Feb. 1, 1917- | 67 | 736 |572 by torpedo; 595 (69%) with Sept. 1, 1917 | |(7 months)
| out warning. | | | Sept. 1, 1917-| 20.2 | 548 |448 (82%) without warning. April 1, 1918 | |(7 months)
| | | | April 1, 1918-| 12 | 252 |239 (91%) without warning. Nov. 1, 1918 | |(7 months) | -------------------------------------------------------------------------

From
July 26, 1917, to October 26, 1918, 90,000 vessels were convoyed, with a total loss from the convoys
of 436, or less than half of one per cent. The convoy system forced submarines to expose themselves
to the attacks of destroyer escorts, or else to work close in shore to set upon vessels after the
dispersion of the convoy. But when working close to the coast they were exposed to Allied patrols
and submarines.

Testifying before a German investigation committee, Captain Bartenbach, of the V-boat section
of the German Admiralty, gave the chief perils encountered by his boats as follows: (1) mines,
(2) Allied submarines, which "destroyed a whole series of our boats,"
(3) aircraft of all types, (4) armed merchantmen, (5) hydrophones
and listening devices.

Admiral Capelle in his testimony referred to the weakening of their efforts due to "indifferent
material and second-rate crews."

Transport Work

Dependent in large measure upon the anti-submarine campaign for its safety and success, yet in itself
an immense achievement, the transport of over 2,000,000 American
troops to France must be regarded as one of the major naval operations
of the war.

Of these forces 48% were carried in British, and 43% in American transports. About 83% of
the convoy work was under the protection of American naval vessels.

The transportation work of the British navy, covering a longer period, was, of course, on a far
greater scale. Speaking in Parliament on October 29, 1917, Premier Lloyd George indicated
the extent of this service as follows: "Since the beginning of the
war the navy has insured the safe transportation to the British and
Allied armies of 13,000,000 men, 12,000,000 horses, 25,000,000 tons
of explosives and supplies, and 51,000,000 tons of coal and oil.

The loss of men out of the whole 13,000,000 was 3500, of which only 2700 were lost through the
action of the enemy. Altogether 130,000,000 tons have been transported by British ships." These
figures, covering but three years of the war, are of significance chiefly as indicating the
immense transportation problems of the British and Allied navies and the use made of sea communications.

These
three main Allied naval operations--the blockade of Germany, the anti-submarine campaign, and
the transportation of American troops to France--were unquestionably decisive factors in the
war. Failure in any one of them would have meant victory for Germany. The peace of Europe, it is
true, could be achieved only by overcoming Germany's military power on land. A breakdown there,
with German domination of the Continent, would have created a situation which it is difficult
to envisage, and which very probably would have meant a peace of compromise and humiliation
for England and America. It is obvious, however, that, but for the blockade, Germany could have prolonged
the war; but for American reënforcements, France would have been
overrun; but for the conquest of the submarine, Great Britain would
have been forced to surrender.

In the spring of 1918 Germany massed her troops on the western front and began her final effort
to break the Allied lines and force a decision. With supreme command for the first time completely
centralized under Marshal Foch, and with the support of American armies, the Allies were able
to hold up the enemy drives, and on July 18 begin the forward movement which pushed the Germans
back upon their frontiers.

Yet when the armistice was signed on November 11, the German armies still maintained cohesion,
with an unbroken line on foreign soil. Surrender was made inevitable by internal breakdown and
revolution, the first open manifestations of which appeared among the sailors of the idle High
Seas Fleet at Kiel.

On November 21, 1918, this fleet, designed as the great instrument for conquest of world empire,
and in its prime perhaps as efficient a war force as was ever set afloat, steamed silently through
two long lines of British and Allied battleships assembled off the Firth of Forth, and the German
flags at the mainmasts went down at sunset for the last time.

REFERENCES

BRASSEY'S NAVAL ANNUAL, 1919. THE VICTORY AT SEA, Vice-Admiral W. S. Sims, U. S. N., 1920. ANNUAL
REPORT of the U. S Secretary of the Navy, 1918 THE DOVER PATROL, 1915-1917, Admiral Sir Reginald
Bacon, R. N., 1919. ZEEBRUGGE AND OSTEND DISPATCHES, ed. by C. Sanford Terry, 1919. LAYING THE
NORTH SEA MINE BARRAGE, Captain R. R. Belknap, U. S. N., U. S. Naval Institute Proceedings, Jan.-Feb.,
1920. AMERICAN SUBMARINE OPERATIONS IN THE WORLD WAR, by Prof. C.
S. Alden, U. S. Naval Institute Proceedings.

June-July, 1920.

 For more popular treatment see also SUBMARINE AND
   ANTI-SUBMARINE, Sir Henry Newbolt,
 1919; THE FIGHTING FLEETS, Ralph D. Payne,
   1918; THE U-BOAT HUNTERS,
 James B. Connolly, 1918; SEA WARFARE, Rudyard
   Kipling, 1917; etc.
 
   CHAPTER XIX

 
   CONCLUSION
 
   The brief survey of sea
 power in the preceding chapters has shown that
   the ocean has been the highway for the march of
 civilization and empire. Crete in its day became
   a great island power and distributed throughout the Mediterranean
the wealth and the arts of its own culture and that of Egypt.

 In turn, Phnicia held sway on the inland
   sea, and though creating little, she seized upon
 and developed the material and intellectual
   resources of her neighbors, and
 carried them not only to the corners of the Mediterranean,
   but far out on the unknown sea. Later when Phnicia
 was subject to Persia, Athens by her triremes
   saved the growing civilization of Greece, and during a brief period
of glory planted the seeds of Greek, as opposed to Asiatic culture,
on the islands and coasts of the Ægean.

After Athens, Carthage inherited the trident, and in turn fell before
the energy of a land power, Rome.

And as the Roman Empire grew to include practically all of the known
world, every waterway, river and ocean, served to spread Roman law,
engineering, and ideals of practical efficiency, at the same time
bringing back to the heart of the Empire not only the products of
the colonies, but such impalpable treasures as the art, literature,
and philosophy of Greece.

This was the story of the sea in antiquity.

After the dissolution of the Roman empire, as Christian peoples were struggling in blood and
darkness, a great menace came from Arabia, the Saracen invasion,
which was checked successfully and repeatedly by the navy of Constantinople.

To this, primarily, is due the preservation of the Christian ideal in the world. Later, the cities
of Italy began to reëstablish sea commerce, which had been for centuries interrupted by pirates.
Venice gained the ascendancy, and Venetian ships carried the Crusading armies during the centuries
when western peoples went eastward to fight for the Cross and brought back new ideas they had
learned from the Infidels. Then there arose a new Mohammedan threat, the Turk, determined
like the earlier Saracen to conquer the world for the Crescent. Constantinople,
betrayed by Christian nations, fell, Christian peoples of the Levant
were made subject to the Turk, and thereafter till our day the Ægean
was a Turkish lake.

About the same time a new Mohammedan sea power arose in the Moors of the African coast, and
for a century and more the Mediterranean was a no-man's land between the rival peoples and
the rival religions.

Meanwhile the trade with the East by caravan routes to the Arabian Gulf had been stopped by the
presence of the Turk. To reach the old markets, therefore, new routes had to be found and there came
the great era of discovery.

The new world was only an accidental discovery in a search for the westward route to Asia.
The claims of Spain to this new region called forth her fleets of trading ships. But the lure
of the West attracted the energies of the English also, and England and Spain clashed. As Spain
became more and more dependent on her western colonies for income, and yet failed to establish
her ascendancy over the Atlantic routes, she declined in favor of her enemies, England and
Holland.

The latter country, being dependent on the sea for sustenance, early captured a large part of
the world's carrying trade, especially in the Mediterranean and the
East.

Her rich profits excited the envy and rivalry of the English, and in consequence, after three
hard-fought naval wars, the scepter of the sea passed to England.

The subsequent wars between England and France served only to strengthen England's control of trade
routes and extend her colonial possessions; with one notable exception, when France, denying
to her rival the control of the sea at a critical juncture in the
American Revolution, deprived her of her richest and most extensive
colony.

It was primarily England with her navy that broke the power of Napoleon
in the subsequent conflict, and throughout a century of peace the
spread of English speech and institutions has extended to the uttermost
parts of the world.

One power in our day challenged Britain's control of the sea--now even more essential to her security
than it was in the 17th century to that of Holland--and the World War was the consequence.

In all this story it is interesting to note that insularity in position is the reverse of insularity
in fact. Crete touched the far shores of the Mediterranean because she was an island and her
people were forced upon the sea.

Similarly, Phnicia, driven to sea by mountains and desert at her back, spread her sails beyond
the Pillars of Hercules. And England, hemmed in by the Atlantic, has carried her goods and
her language to every nook and cranny of the earth. Thus the ocean has served less to separate
than to bring together. As a common highway it has not only excited quarrels, but established
common interests between nations. Special agreements governing the suppression of piracy and
the slave trade, navigation regulations and the like, have long since brought nations together
in peace on a common ground.

It has also gone far to create international law for the problems of war. Rules governing blockade,
contraband, and neutral rights have been agreed upon long since. But, as every war has proved,
international law has needed a higher authority to enforce its rules in the teeth of a powerful
belligerent. To remedy this defect is one of the purposes of a League of Nations.

Such has been the significance of the sea.

Audrey was quiet, but she was as set as Blackcap Down.

"'Tis not my own fancy, Dickon," she pleaded at last, her blue eyes dim with tears. "I ha'
no love for strange lands,--nor strange folk neither. But my lady has been ever kind to me,
and she is in great trouble. If she fall ill on the journey there is none but me that knows
her ways. I should ha' no peace if I left her in strange hands. 'Tis my duty, Dickon. There's
no two ways of duty for any christened soul."

Dickon grew bolder at the sight of those tears. "Audrey," he said, "when you come back, and
your lady is among her own folk again--then will you break the silver penny with me?"

"Oh," said Audrey shyly and quickly, her eyes downcast, "I'll do that now, if ye like,--Dickon,
lad."

So they broke the coin and each kept half, and said farewell, she for the sake of her duty
and he for the sake of his own honor, which was bound up with hers. But after she had gone
away he was troubled by many doubts whether he should not have held on, and made her come with
him in spite of herself.

Meanwhile he had no mind to return to England, and found work where he was. The little shop
of Gaston of Abbeville would have interested any lad in love with the armorer's trade, and
it had more attraction for Dickon than anything else he had found in that place. Wedged in,
like a nutshell in the jaws of a nutcracker, between a round tower built by Rollo's men and
the far older wall of a Roman basilica, it was partly built of Norman stone-work and partly
of oak. Set close to the old Roman road through Gaul, it was in view of any knight or squire
or man-at-arms who went by, and it was so arranged that all the contents could be seen at a glance.

The heavy and bulky forge and tools of an English smithy were not to be seen. Since horses
were not shod there, little room was needed, and the armorer could lay his hand on any tool
he needed without taking more than a step or two. Hammer, tongs, bellows and other belongings
not at the moment in use were hung tidily on the walls. Some of these were most skillfully
shaped to their use, and also ornamented with carving on the handles. The carving was not only
decorative but was so designed as to give a firmer hold to the hand.

Along the upper part of the rear wall and the end wall on the right, supported on corbels of
stone, was a narrow gallery, built of oak, the front carved in a series of open interlacing
arches. Inside this were suits of costly armor, and weapons of especial value, which the armorer
kept for sale. A flight of steps closed in by a paneled oaken partition descended from this
gallery to the ground, and on each step was the straight demure figure of a carved saint in
a pointed arch like a shrine. At the foot the stairway was closed by a door of seasoned oak
reenforced by wrought iron hinges extending almost across its width. When this door was fastened
the treasures in the gallery were safe from thieves. A little wall-shrine of carved, painted
and gilded wood, on the opposite wall, held a statuette of Saint Eloi, the patron of metal-workers.
In short, the shop, though small, had been made beautiful with the care of one who loved and
reverenced his work.

When Dickon halted there at the close of a dusty summer day Gaston was engaged in some work
for a knight of Saint John, which must be done that night and needed four hands in place of
two. The armorer was doing it all himself, with the skill of a master-workman, but using much
picturesque French language to relieve his mind.

It did not take a minute after Dickon got a hammer in his hand, for Gaston's frown to change
to a broad and satisfied smile. Here was a helper after his own ideas--strong, deft, and no
talker. Like many men who love talk for its own sake the master was not fond of chatterboxes.
The job was finished in good and workmanlike fashion, and Gaston, who knew some English, went
on talking while he attended to other odd matters and waited for his customer.

"If you want to see the world--this is your place. . . . There's not much that goes along this
road that doesn't come to Gaston of Abbeville some day. . . . Damaskeening? You'll see as much
damaskeened work here as you could in Damascus. . . . Look here, my lad, if you're in want
of work, stay with me till snowfall and see the pilgrims, and the knights, and the bowmen,
and the free companions with their plunder, go by to the sea. Then ye may go on to Damascus
if you're still set on the place, with some hope of not losing your way."

This seemed to Dickon a rather good idea. In his brief sojourn in Abbeville he had come to
see the difficulty of travel in a land where no one understands your questions.

It was as Gaston said. People of all races, kinds and conditions traveled the highway that
ran past the armorers' shop. Once Guy Bouverel, whom Dickon had met once or twice at Wilfrid's
house, gave him surprised and pleased greeting. A little later came Padraig, the Irish clerk,
on his way to Rouen. Padraig somehow learned about Audrey in the few hours he spent there.

"I thought 'twas more than hammer and tongs that took you out of Sussex," he said. "I wish
ye luck, but there's no knowing, Dickon, what they will do when they are seized with this pilgrimage
fever."

"'Tis not the lass, 'tis her lady," Dickon muttered, his head in his hands. "And the worst
o't is that I can do nothing but think of her away there among the paynim. A fine lady's train
has no call for such as me."

Padraig's brows lifted in humorous but sympathetic understanding. "I see," he said. "I'll tell
the maid, if I see her, that she'll find none so well worth her while among Saracens--or pilgrims
either."

There was a great jousting at Crecy a little later, and Gaston went there to deal with certain
knights and princes among the tilters, and left the shop in Dickon's charge. Restless with
the magic of a summer night after he had barred the little place, he wandered away over the
white ancient road. He lay down on a grassy bank, where boughs laden with drifting blossoms
hung over an orchard wall, and looked up at the stars, thinking.

"'Tes like what they tell of the Saracens' magic," he said half aloud, "this that makes a man
do what's clean against his own will."

"Hammer not cold iron, friend," said a deep voice near by. "Saracen magic is naught save the
wisdom of necessity, and that we all learn in our time."

Dickon looked up at a tall man in a traveler's cloak, who had come through the gate in the
wall just then. The upper part of the face was hidden by the hood, but the mouth wore a quiet
smile. The voice was that of a knight, and Dickon got to his feet and bowed. "I know not what
you were thinking of when you spoke of Saracen magic," the stranger went on, "but I would I
could find an armorer for a bit of work on my dagger. 'Tis a Damascus blade, but there's no
gramarye in it, I promise you."

This was something to do at any rate. "An't please you, my lord," Dickon said quickly, "I am
journeyman to Gaston of Abbeville, who is counted the best armorer in these parts. I may be
able for the work if 'tis not too skillful."

"I could do it myself," the knight said carelessly, "if I had but the fire and tools. I came
but an hour ago, and I must go on to-morrow."

The two went back to the shop, and the fire was kindled, a torch was set in a wrought-iron
wall-cresset, and the work begun. Dickon saw with surprise that the knight himself had no small
knowledge of the craft of the armorer.

The dagger was of the finest Saracen steel work, the haft inlaid with gold. Inside it the knight
wished to conceal some jewels of no very great value, in a hollow made for the purpose and
opened by twisting a round boss on the hilt. This was often done by travelers, since a man's
dagger was his companion day and night, and in case of disaster he might thus have at hand
the means to pay his way.

"That blade," the knight observed, trying its edge, "was the gift of a Saracen emir I made
friends with beyond Damascus. Nay, look not so amazed, lad. They are no more wizards than you
or I."

He must have divined the questions trembling on Dickon's lips, for when the work was done he
still sat in the doorway and seemed in no haste to go. The white moon flooded the place and
with the glow of the brazier made curious blended lights and shadows. The knight had thrown
aside his cloak, and showed himself bronzed, keen-faced and active, like one who had done his
part both in council-hall and camp. "It is like this," he went on, clasping his knee with brown
strong hands. "This Christendom of ours is all ringed round with heathenesse--Moors, Danes,
Bulgars, Arabs, Turks-- peoples white, brown, black, but caring naught for those things which
are dear and precious to Christian men and women. I have been where the beacons flashed from
hill to hill along the shore of Britain to warn the villages of Danish pirates. I have seen
the Moors from Barbary come swarming over the borders of Granada and Andalusia until the Christians
were all but driven back into the mountains. Our faith is not their faith, our oaths are not
their oaths, nor our ways their ways.

"Now the paynim of the desert live not in towns and cities as we do, but in tents. The wealth
of a chief is in his flocks and herds,--sheep and goats, camels, the swift desert horses. The
wealth of a sultan is in the lances he can call to his banner in time of war, under their own
leaders. There is only one war-cry that makes one host of them all, and that is 'Allah-hu!'
Saladin might promise ten times over, and thousands of his subjects would never know it or
be bound by it. And what can you do when a promise is of no value?

"It is the same with the heathen who come raiding over the North Sea. They plunder and pillage
as they list, whether it be palace, abbey or nunnery that lies in their way. Honor has no meaning
to those who prey on the helpless."

"My lord," said Dickon hesitatingly, "you mean that--that--honor is for all men--though they
take no vows?"

The stranger's voice rang like steel on steel. "Honor is for all true men- -and women--king
or knight, merchant or peasant, bond or free. A slave may be loyal to his master--the master
must keep faith with the slave. Christ died for all--for their souls, not their houses of stone
or brick or timber. Do you think, if He were on earth now, He would choose to be served only
by those of gentle blood?"

This was a new thought to Dickon, though he had always known the stories of the healing of
the blind and the leprous, and the birth at Bethlehem. The knight went on, rising and taking
up his cloak, "As for the magic you have heard of, it is nothing but the practice of centuries.
The desert chiefs, from whom the Moslems are mostly descended, are ever wandering from place
to place, where their beasts can find grazing. Hence all their wealth must be carried on pack
saddles. They can make with their many- colored shawls and rugs a palace out of a tent pitched
for the night. They work leather, iron, brass, because this can be done without long stay in
any one place. And when a people can have but few luxuries they grow very skillful in the making
of those few. They carry their wisdom in such matters, as they do their wealth, wherever they
go, and hand it down from father to son. That is all the sorcery they use.

"I have told you these things because a man should have neither overmuch fear nor any contempt
for his enemy, and these paynim are, or may be at any time, our enemies. Our faith must be
as this dagger, ready for service by day or night, but for defense, not for assassination.
Since Saladin has come to the throne there is a stirring among the tribes that worship the
false prophet, and they may be once more dreaming that they may conquer the world for Islam.
They can never do it, but they may force us to another Crusade in time. I am on my way to England
now to make report to the King of what I have seen. I hope that some day we may meet there.
If ever you want work, Sir Gualtier Giffard on the Welsh border will bid you welcome if you
say that you were sent by Hugh l'Estrange."

Moved by sudden impulse Dickon told in a few words the story of Audrey's service and their
promise. The knight held out his hand in open kindliness. "You did well," he said. "Every man
who keeps faith with his neighbor, every good soldier, every wise and gentle monk, and more
than all, every true woman, is a link in a great chain that makes for the safety of Christendom.
A token is a small thing,--yes--but what is our Cross itself but a token? I would wish my own
lad Roger to have acted as you did."

AWAKENING

 Before the snows are melted that cradle the mountain streams,
 Before the bear and the dormouse rouse from their winter dreams,
 Before the earliest linnet flutes forth his roundel clear,
 There comes an authentic moment that marks the turn of the year.

 A brightness in the sunshine, a hint of life in the air,
 A soft mist veiling the hilltops that were so brown and bare,
 Nothing to note or ponder, nothing to see or hear,--
 But there is a mystic difference that marks the turn of the year!

 Light as the wings of a sea-mew in the rush of startled flight,
 Cool as the touch of clover, shy as the dews of night,
 Strong as the love of freedom, sudden as panic fear,
 The restless gypsy longing wakes at the turn of the year.

 Why do we toil and swelter over the task we hate?
 What is to keep us fettered to the benches of sullen Fate?
 There is nothing half so fleeting,--there is nothing half so dear
 As the unfulfilled desire that comes with the turn of the year!

X

FOOLS' GOLD

"Yes," acknowledged old Tomaso thoughtfully, "I knew Archiater of Byzantium very well at one
time,--and yet no one ever really knew much about him. He was more than a clever alchemist,--he
was a discoverer of secrets, and a good man. But for all that, he was condemned and executed
as a wizard."

Alan of York said nothing for a minute, but his fist clenched where it lay on the table. "How
could such a thing happen?" he said at last in a low voice.

"Naturally enough, when wisdom must ever contend against the whelming force of folly. But there
is something worse--the will of a ruler seeking to enslave knowledge to his own purpose. A
madman with ideals is bad enough, but Barbarossa's son is a diabolically sane person without
any. A man is not called 'the Cruel' without reason."

"But what object--" Alan began, and paused.

"Archiater the physician, as I knew him, would have been rather worse than useless to that
prince as I have heard of him," answered the Paduan deliberately. "Such a patron demands creatures
who do as they are told,-- which is not the duty of a philosopher. The easiest way to dispose
of a man who knows too much is to dub him a wizard. But, of course, all this is merely guessing
in the dark.

"The little that I do know is this. When we had been acquainted for about three years he told
me that he had been offered the use of a house in Goslar in which he might carry on his experiments
privately. The chief inducement, for him, lay in the nature of the country, which is very rich
in minerals, and he decided to leave Padua in the hope of making important discoveries in this
new field. He went first to Hildesheim and developed a formula for making bronze which is said
to be extraordinary, and then began exploring the Harz mountains. He sent me some of the ores
he found; it appears that there is nearly everything in those ranges. I heard no more until
the news came, in a roundabout way, that he was dead and his ashes cast to the four winds.
His writings were supposed to have been burned at the same time, but not all of them were,
for three manuscripts at least must have gone to make up the fragments we found among our bezants.
I wish for your sake, Alan, my son, that I could tell you more, for I know of no man who would
gain more by Archiater's work than you. If he had been your master I think you might have rivaled
the Venetians."

Alan was not vain, and he never dreamed that Tomaso thought so highly of his ability. In the
Middle Ages the secrets of such arts as glass-making, enameling, leather work, gold and silver
work, and the making of dyestuffs, were most jealously guarded. Alan had had two fortunate
accidents in his life; he had been taught in the beginning by a master- artist, and later had
come upon writings by a still greater genius, the Byzantine philosopher of whom Tomaso had
been speaking.

From the first glimpse he had had of the crabbed, clear handwriting, the terse phrases, the
daring and independent thought of Archiater, he had been fascinated. Now he had set out to
cross the narrow seas and find out what, if anything, remained of the master's life-work.

"May there not have been some friend or pupil," he asked wistfully, "who would have rescued
his manuscripts?"

"In that case," Tomaso replied with gentle finality, "I think some of us must have heard of it."

"And yet," Alan persisted, "some one had those parchments--some one who may have received them
from Archiater himself."

"Take care," the old man said with a rather melancholy smile. "That a thing is possible and
desirable, is no proof that it is true. To search for that man seems to me like hunting the
forest for last year's leaves. But here come friends of yours."

Guy Bouverel came springing up the stair, Giovanni and Padraig close behind him. When greetings
had been exchanged, and Alan had told the others that he was in London only for a brief stay
on his way to France, Tomaso addressed the young goldsmith.

"Guy," he said, "did you ever ferret out anything more about those parchment scraps we found
among the King's coin? You said that you should make some inquiries." "Bezants are bezants
and tell no tales," said Guy with a shrug. "And if they did, they might lie, like so many of
those who love them. Why, you recall that I repacked that gold in my own chest because I thought
one of the clerks was growing too fond of it. I took it as it lay and never looked at the parchments.
I met the clerk one day in Chepe and questioned him. He said that the gold was a part of that
the King recovered from the London Templars--you know, when he had to come with an armed guard
to get his moneys that were stored in their house. Gregory of Hildesheim had something to do
with it, for he was very wroth when he found that I had got this particular chest. But he could
not have known what these scripts were or he would have kept them in a sealed packet under
his own hand."

"He could not have read most of them," said Tomaso. "Archiater usually wrote his diaries in
cipher. Who is this clerk?"

"Simon Gastard his name is. He was very anxious to leave England when last I saw him. He was
at me to join in a scheme for digging gold out of the Harz mountains--Padraig, what are you
grinning at?"

"Only to see how keen is your nose for a thief," Padraig chuckled. "If Simon is after digging
gold out of the ground with his hands 'tis the honestest plan he has had this long time. Simon
thinks gold is what heaven is made of. He would look at the sunset and calculate what the gold
would be worth in zecchins--he would. But why all this talk of the parchments?"

"Because I have a mind to see whether any more of Archiater's work is to be found," said Alan
quietly. "It may be a fool's errand, but I could not rest till I had made a beginning."

Three faces looked astonished, sympathetic and interested. Alan had the hearty liking of his
friends. They could depend upon him as on the market cross. But they would almost as soon have
expected to see that cross set forth on pilgrimage as to find the quiet North Country glassmaker
beginning any such weird journey as this.

Tomaso broke the little silence, leaning forward in his oaken chair, his finger-tips meeting.
"We may as well sift what evidence we have," he said. "If the manuscripts had been in the hands
of any one who knew the cipher he must have done work so far beyond anything else in his craft
that it would be heard of. Archiater never made use of half his discoveries--and he was always
finding out secrets concerning the crafts. He knew things about glassmaking, enamel-work, dyestuffs,
and medicine, that no one else did. He was occupied almost wholly with experiment and research.
There are not two such men in a century.

"Giovanni, you are the only one of us who has been beyond the Rhine. Do you know any one there
who might possibly aid in this search?"

The Lombard seldom talked unless he was directly addressed. "One man," he said, "might know
the truth."

"Would he reply to a letter?"

Giovanni shook his head. "He does not write letters. If I could see him I would ask him, but
the air of Goslar is not wholesome for me." He looked at Alan curiously. "Do you think of going
there?"

"Why not?" Alan returned.

"There are rather more than half a score of reasons why not," said Giovanni, with a little
mocking smile. "Do you speak many foreign languages?"

"Only French."

"And the moment you opened your mouth they would know you for an Englishman. A foreign glassworker
searching for the books of a reputed wizard who made the Hildesheim bronze they are so proud
of. That would interest the Imperial spies."

"Vanni," said Alan, getting up, "I know well what a hare-brained undertaking this must seem
to you. But if you see fit to give me any advice, I shall value it."

The young men took their leave of Tomaso and followed the curving shore of the Thames eastward
to the city. "Look you," said Guy presently, "I have a plan--not a very shrewd one perhaps,
but you shall judge of that. This clerk, Simon Gastard, knows the country and the language.
If his story is true it may be worth looking into. I would not trust him alone with the value
of a Scotch penny. But if you were to go with him as my proxy, you would have a chance of talking
with this man Giovanni has in mind."

Padraig sniffed. "And Simon would sell ye to the devil if he got his price. 'Tis pure rainbow-chasing,
Alan--but I love ye for it."

"Fools are safer than philosophers, in some parts of the world," observed Giovanni dryly. "And
they are commoner everywhere. I hear that the Templars are trying to find a tame wizard who
can be kept in a tower to make gold."

"Vanni," said Guy demurely, "did you ever, in your travels, hear of any one making gold?"

"No," said the Milanese, "but I have known of a score finding fool's gold, and that's the kind
you come on at the end of the rainbow. Alan, if you are resolved on this thing, I will give
you a token and a password to a man you can trust."

At London Stone they separated, Giovanni turning toward London Bridge, Padraig wending his
way to Saint Paul's, Guy and Alan making their way through clamorous narrow streets to the
Sign of the Gold Finch.

"By Saint Loy," said the goldsmith suddenly, "here comes the clerk himself. Gastard," he beckoned
to a little threadbare man edging along by the wall, "I have a question to ask about the matter
you wot of."

If Alan had heard nothing beforehand he would have taken the man for a fussy, inoffensive little
scrivener who would never do more than he was bid--or less. But when they were seated in the
private room above the shop, in which Guy kept some of the finest of his gold and silver work,
Simon's restless eyes began to glitter, and he reminded Alan of a rat in the dairy.

Guy came at once to the point. Would Simon repeat his story for Alan's enlightenment? Simon
would. He related how, when returning from pilgrimage, he had lost his way in the Harz valley
and come upon a hermitage where a very old monk lay near death. In gratitude (Simon said) for
services to him in his extremity, the hermit had revealed the secret of a rich mine of gold
in the mountains. Simon had gone to the mine, secured nuggets of the precious metal, but most
unfortunately had shown them to Gregory of Hildesheim, a Templar said to be wise in the arts
of alchemy and metal-working. Gregory had seemed interested at first, but afterward had told
him that the ore was not gold at all, but a cunning counterfeit devised by Satan. He had not
even returned the specimens, but had railed upon Simon for trying to pass them off as gold.
That night a heavy snowfall, the first of many, made it impossible to visit the mine again.
Now that Gregory was in England Simon wished to go again and secure more of the gold secretly.
It was scarcely possible to find the place without direction, but one man, Simon solemnly declared,
could, with pick and shovel and leathern bag, bring away a fortune.

"It would be necessary," said Guy, "to purify the gold so far as to make it into rude ingots,
if it is, as you say, in the rocks and not in free lumps and particles washed down a stream.
You need a companion who understands such work. Now, I cannot take up the matter myself, but
my friend here knows enough of metals, though he is no goldsmith, to do that part of the work.
Some sort of makeshift laboratory might be arranged for that. Then, if it is really a rich
mine, we will see what can be done next. But you will understand that I cannot be expected
to undertake any work involving great expense unless I have some other proof than you can give
me now. If you will take my friend to this mine, so that he may secure ore enough to make his
experiments, and I see the gold for myself, I will pay the cost of the expedition. More than
this, it seems to me, you cannot expect."

With this Simon effusively agreed. Alan had been watching Guy's face with interest during the
interview. The Londoner's usual debonair manner had become the cool decision of a man with
whom it is unsafe to deal slyly.

When Simon's back had vanished in the crowd of Chepe, Guy began rolling up papers and closing
books. "That may save you some time and trouble," he said, "if you can stomach his company.
I do not believe, you know, that there is any gold in the ledges. Simon knows no more of the
nature of metals than Saint Anthony's Pig."

"What is the truth of the matter, do you think?" asked Alan.

"I thought at first that he had invented the whole story. But in that case he would hardly
have agreed to my plan so eagerly. It is just possible, of course, that gold is there--it has
been found in the Harz. He says that the stuff is not brittle, and can be hammered and cut,
which does not sound like an iron ore. And his description of the rocks is too good to be his
own fancy. Again, the ore may be 'fool's gold',--a mixture of copper and sulphur. In that case
you will know it right enough when you come to the roasting of it. In any case I am interested
enough in the tale to take a little trouble, and you and your private treasure-hunt happen
to alloy very happily with my curiosity."

"Guy," said Alan, "you may laugh, but your aid means more to me than you know. If the clerk's
tale is false you shall be repaid for your outlay."

"Pshaw!" laughed Guy, "a copper mine is good enough to repay me. And then, I take a certain
interest in the manuscripts you are after. After all, if you should find them it would be no
stranger than those parchments coming to us as they did, through the very hands of both Gregory
and Simon. That was a golden jest--but we must keep it hid for awhile. And now, what I know
of metals and their ways is at your service."

Behold Alan then, after no more than the usual adventures of a journey, busied with a small
furnace in a small stone-floored room over an archway in the walled city of Goslar. It was
a late spring and bitterly cold, and the heat of the fire was grateful. Simon had thus far
put off taking his companion to see the mine, and Alan had been occupied with fitting up a
place in which the ore should be tested when the time came.

Hearing the blare of trumpets, he craned his head out of window, and caught a glimpse of the
imperial banner flaunting and snapping in the chill wind. He caught up cap and cloak and ran
down the winding stone stairs, coming out upon the market-square just as the guards entered
it. So close that Alan could have touched him, there went by a humped and twisted figure with
a jester's bells and bauble--a man with a maliciously smiling mouth and wicked, observant,
tired eyes. The white pointed beard and worn, lined face belonged to an older man than Alan
had expected to see. The eyes met his for a second, he flung his cloak over the left shoulder
with the gesture Giovanni had taught him, and a few minutes later an impudent small page pulled
his sleeve and whispered that Master Stefano desired to see him.

The boy led him through ancient streets to the entrance of a tall house near the wall, and
went off whistling. An old woman opened the door and showed him into a little ante-room where,
the jester sat, perched upon the corner of a table. Alan bowed, and waited in silence.

"Very well," said the jester with a laugh. Had he done so it would have been impossible for
him to recover the respect of the House.

Then it was rumoured that two or three others had gone with Sir Timothy. And on Monday morning
it was proclaimed that the Prime Minister was not in a condition to withdraw his resignation.
On the Tuesday the House met and Mr. Monk announced, still from the
Opposition benches, that he had that morning been with the Queen.

Then there was another adjournment, and all the Liberals knew that the gates of Paradise were again
about to be opened to them.

This is only interesting to us as affecting the happiness and character
of our Duke.

He had consented to assist Mr. Monk in forming a government, and to take office under Mr. Monk's
leadership. He had had many contests with himself before he could
bring himself to this submission.

He knew that if anything could once again make him contented it would be work; he knew that
if he could serve his country it was his duty to serve it; and he knew also that it was only
by the adhesion of such men as himself that the traditions of his
party could be maintained.

But he had been Prime Minister,--and he was sure he could never be
Prime Minister again.

There are in all matters certain little, almost hidden, signs, by
which we can measure within our own bosoms the extent of our successes
and our failures.

Our Duke's friends had told him that his Ministry had been serviceable to the country; but no
one had ever suggested to him that he would again be asked to fill
the place which he had filled.

He had stopped a gap. He would beforehand have declared himself willing to serve his country
even in this way; but having done so,--having done that and no more
than that,--he felt that he had failed.

He had in his soreness declared to himself that he would never more take office. He had much
to do to overcome this promise to himself;--but when he had brought himself to submit, he was certainly
a happier man.

There was no going to see the Queen. That on the present occasion was done simply by Mr. Monk.
But on the Wednesday morning his name appeared in the list of the new Cabinet as President of
the Council. He was perhaps a little fidgety, a little too anxious to employ himself and to
be employed, a little too desirous of immediate work;--but still he was happy and gracious to
those around him.

"I suppose you like that particular office," Silverbridge said to him.

"Well; yes;--not best of all, you know," and he smiled as he made this admission.

"You mean Prime Minister?"

"No, indeed I don't. I am inclined to think that the Premier should always sit in your House.
No, Silverbridge.

If I could have my way,--which is of course impossible, for I cannot put off my honours,--I would return
to my old place. I would return to the Exchequer where the work is hard and certain, where
a man can do, or at any rate attempt to do, some special thing.

A man there if he sticks to that and does not travel beyond it, need not be popular, need not be
a partisan, need not be eloquent, need not be a courtier.

He should understand his profession, as should a lawyer or a doctor. If he does that thoroughly
he can serve his country without recourse to that parliamentary strategy for which I know that
I am unfit."

"You can't do that in the House of Lords, sir."

"No; no. I wish the title could have passed over my head, Silverbridge, and gone to you at once.
I think we both should have been suited better. But there are things which one should not consider.
Even in this place I may perhaps do something. Shall you attack us very bitterly?"

"I am the only man who does not mean to make any change."

"How so?"

"I shall stay where I am,--on the Government side of the House."

"Are you clear about that, my boy?"

"Quite clear."

"Such changes should not be made without very much consideration."

"I have already written to them at Silverbridge and have had three or four answers. Mr. De Boung
says that the borough is more than grateful. Mr. Sprout regrets it much, and suggests a few
months' consideration. Mr. Sprugeon seems to think it does not signify."

"That is hardly complimentary."

"No,--not to me. But he is very civil to the family.

As long as a Palliser represents the borough, Mr. Sprugeon thinks that it does not matter much
on which side he may sit.

I have had my little vagary, and I don't think that I shall change again."

"I suppose it is your republican bride-elect that has done that,"
said the Duke, laughing.

 

 
                           CHAPTER LXXIX
 
 The First Wedding
 
 As Easter Sunday fell on the 17th April,
 and as the arrangement of the new Cabinet,
 with its inferior offices, was not completed
 till the 6th of that month, there was only
 just time for the new elections before the holidays.
 Mr. Monk sat on his bench so comfortably
 that he hardly seemed ever to have been
 off it.

 And Phineas Finn resumed the peculiar ministerial tone of voice just
as though he had never allowed himself to use the free and indignant
strains of opposition.

 As to a majority,--nothing
                            as yet was known about
 that. Some few besides Silverbridge might
 probably transfer themselves to the Government.
 None of the ministers lost their seats at
 the new elections. The opposite party seemed
 for a while to have been paralysed by the defection
 of Sir Timothy, and men who liked a quiet
 life were able to comfort themselves with the reflection
 that nothing could be done this Session.

For
 our lovers this was convenient. Neither of them
 would have allowed their parliamentary energies
 to have interfered at such a crisis with his
 domestic affairs; but still it was well to
 have time at command.

 The day for the marriage of Isabel and Silverbridge
 had been now fixed. That was to take place on the
 Wednesday after Easter, and was to be celebrated
 by special royal favour in the chapel at Whitehall.
 All the Pallisers would be there, and all
 the relations of all the Pallisers, all the ambassadors,
 and of course all the Americans in London. It
 would be a "wretched grind," as Silverbridge
 said, but it had to be done. In the meantime
 the whole party, including the new President
 of the Council, were down at Matching. Even
 Isabel, though it must be presumed that she had
                        much to do
                             in looking after her bridal garments, was able to be there for a
day or two.

But Tregear was the person to whom this visit was of the greatest
importance.

He had been allowed to see Lady Mary in London, but hardly to do more than see her. With her he
had been alone for about five minutes, and then cruel circumstances,--circumstances,
however, which were not permanently cruel,--had separated them.

All their great difficulties had been settled, and no doubt they were happy. Tregear, though
he had been as it were received into grace by that glass of wine,
still had not entered into the intimacies of the house.

This he felt himself.

He had been told that he had better restrain himself from writing to Mary, and he had restrained
himself. He had therefore no immediate opportunity of creeping into that perfect intimacy with
the house and household which is generally accorded to a promised son-in-law.

On this occasion he travelled down alone, and as he approached the house he, who was not by nature
timid, felt himself to be somewhat cowed. That the Duke should not be cold to him was almost impossible.
Of course he was there in opposition to the Duke's wishes.

Even Silverbridge had never quite liked the match. Of course he was to have all that he desired.
Of course he was the most fortunate of men. Of course no man had ever stronger reason to be
contented with the girl he loved. But still his heart was a little low as he was driven up to
the door.

The first person whom he saw was the Duke himself, who, as the fly from the station arrived,
was returning from his walk. "You are welcome to Matching," he said, taking off his hat with
something of ceremony. This was said before the servants, but Tregear was then led into the
study and the door was closed. "I never do anything by halves, Mr. Tregear," he said. "Since
it is to be so you shall be the same to me as though you had come under other auspices. Of yourself
personally I hear all that is good. Consider yourself at home here, and in all things use me
as your friend." Tregear endeavoured to make some reply, but could not find words that were fitting.
"I think that the young people are out," continued the Duke. "Mr. Warburton will help you to find
them if you like to go upon the search."

The words had been very gracious, but still there was something in the manner of the man which
made Tregear find it almost impossible to regard him as he might have regarded another father-in-law.
He had often heard the Duke spoken of as a man who could become awful
if he pleased, almost without an effort.

He had been told of the man's mingled simplicity, courtesy, and self-assertion against which
no impudence or raillery could prevail. And now he seemed to understand it.

He was not driven to go under the private secretary's escort in quest of the young people.
Mary had understood her business much better than that.

"If you please, sir, Lady Mary is in the little drawing-room," said a well-arrayed young girl
to him as soon as the Duke's door was closed. This was Lady Mary's own maid who had been on the
look-out for the fly. Lady Mary had known all details, as to the arrival of the trains and
the length of the journey from the station, and had not been walking
with the other young people when the Duke had intercepted her lover.

Even that delay she had thought was hard.

The discreet maid opened the door of the little drawing-room,--and discreetly closed it instantly.
"At last!" she said, throwing herself into his arms.

"Yes,--at last."

On this occasion time did not envy them. The long afternoons of spring had come, and as Tregear
had reached the house between four and five they were able to go
out together before the sun set.

"No," she said when he came to inquire as to her life during the last twelve months; "you had
not much to be afraid of as to my forgetting."

"But when everything was against me?"

"One thing was not against you. You ought to have been sure of that."

"And so I was. And yet I felt that I ought not to have been sure. Sometimes, in my solitude,
I used to think that I myself had been wrong. I began to doubt whether under any circumstances I
could have been justified in asking your father's daughter to be my wife."

"Because of his rank?"

"Not so much his rank as his money."

"Ought that to be considered?"

"A poor man who marries a rich woman will always be suspected."

"Because people are so mean and poor-spirited; and because they think that money is more than anything
else. It should be nothing at all in such matters. I don't know how it can be anything. They
have been saying that to me all along,--as though one were to stop to think whether one was
rich or poor." Tregear, when this was said, could not but remember that at a time not very
much prior to that at which Mary had not stopped to think, neither for a while had he and Mabel.
"I suppose it was worse for me than for you," she added.

"I hope not."

"But it was, Frank; and therefore I ought to have it made up to me now. It was very bad to be alone
here, particularly when I felt that papa always looked at me as though I were a sinner. He
did not mean it, but he could not help looking at me like that.

And there was nobody to whom I could say a word."

"It was pretty much the same with me."

"Yes; but you were not offending a father who could not keep himself from looking reproaches
at you. I was like a boy at school who had been put into Coventry.

And then they sent me to Lady Cantrip!"

"Was that very bad?"

"I do believe that if I were a young woman with a well-ordered mind, I should feel myself very much
indebted to Lady Cantrip. She had a terrible task of it. But I could
not teach myself to like her.

I believe she knew all through that I should get my way at last."

"That ought to have made you friends."

"But yet she tried everything she could. And when I told her about that meeting up at Lord Grex's,
she was so shocked! Do you remember that?"

"Do I remember it!"

"Were not you shocked?" This question was not to be answered by any
word.

"I was," she continued.

"It was an awful thing to do; but I was determined to show them all
that I was in earnest.

Do you remember how Miss Cassewary looked?"

"Miss Cassewary knew all about it."

"I daresay she did. And so I suppose did Mabel Grex. I had thought
that perhaps I might make Mabel a confidante, but--"

Then she looked up into his face.

"But what?"

"You like Mabel, do you not? I do."

"I like her very, very much."

"Perhaps you have liked her too well for that, eh, Frank?"

"Too well for what?"

"That she should have heard all that I had to say about you with sympathy.
If so, I am so sorry."

"You need not fear that I have ever for a moment been untrue either to her or you."

"I am sure you have not to me. Poor Mabel! Then they took me to Custins. That was worst of all.
I cannot quite tell you what happened there."

Of course he asked her,--but, as she had said, she could not quite tell him about Lord Popplecourt.

The
next morning the Duke asked his guest in a playful tone what was
his Christian name.

It could hardly be that he should not have known, but yet he asked
the question.

"Francis Oliphant," said Tregear. "Those are two Christian names I suppose, but what do they
call you at home?"

"Frank," whispered Mary, who was with them.

"Then I will call you Frank, if you will allow me. The use of Christian names is, I think, pleasant
and hardly common enough among us.

I almost forget my own boy's name because the practice has grown
up of calling him by a title."

"I am going to call him Abraham," said Isabel.

"Abraham is a good name, only I do not think he got it from his godfathers
and godmothers."

"Who can call a man Plantagenet? I should as soon think of calling my father-in-law Coeur de
Lion."

"So he is," said Mary.

Whereupon the Duke kissed the two girls and went his way,--showing that by this time he had adopted
the one and the proposed husband of the other into his heart.

The day before the Duke started for London to be present at the grand
marriage he sent for Frank.

"I suppose," said he, "that you would wish that some time should be fixed for your own marriage."
To this the accepted suitor of course assented.

"But before we can do that something must be settled about--money." Tregear when he heard
this became hot all over, and felt that he could not restrain his blushes. Such must be the
feeling of a man when he finds himself compelled to own to a girl's father that he intends to live
upon her money and not upon his own.

"I do not like to be troublesome," continued the Duke, "or to ask questions which might seem
to be impertinent."

"Oh no! Of course I feel my position. I can only say that it was not because your daughter might
probably have money that I first sought her love."

"It shall be so received. And now-- But perhaps it will be best that
you should arrange all this with my man of business.

Mr. Moreton shall be instructed. Mr. Moreton lives near my place in Barsetshire, but is now
in London. If you will call on him he shall tell you what I would
suggest.

I hope you will find that your affairs will be comfortable. And now as to the time."

Isabel's wedding was declared by the newspapers to have been one of the most brilliant remembered
in the metropolis. There were six bridesmaids, of whom of course Mary was one,--and of whom poor
Lady Mabel Grex was equally of course not another.

Poor Lady Mabel was at this time with Miss Cassewary at Grex, paying what she believed would
be a last visit to the old family home. Among the others were two American girls, brought into
that august society for the sake of courtesy rather than of personal
love.

And there were two other Palliser girls and a Scotch McCloskie cousin. The breakfast was of course
given by Mr. Boncassen at his house in Brook Street, where the bridal
presents were displayed.

And not only were they displayed; but a list of them, with an approximating statement as to their
value, appeared in one or two of the next day's newspapers;--as to
which terrible sin against good taste neither was Mr. or Mrs. Boncassen
guilty.

But in these days, in which such splendid things were done on so very splendid a scale, a young lady
cannot herself lay out her friends' gifts so as to be properly seen
by her friends.

Some well-skilled, well-paid hand is needed even for that, and hence comes this public information
on affairs which should surely be private.

In our grandmothers' time the happy bride's happy mother herself compounded the cake;--or at
any rate the trusted housekeeper.

But we all know that terrible tower of silver which now stands niddle-noddling with its appendages
of flags and spears on the modern wedding breakfast-table. It will come to pass with some of us
soon that we must deny ourselves the pleasure of having young friends, because their marriage presents
are so costly.

Poor Mrs. Boncassen had not perhaps a happy time with her august guests
on that morning; but when she retired to give Isabel her last kiss
in privacy she did feel proud to think that her daughter would some
day be an English Duchess.

CHAPTER LXXX
The Second Wedding

November is not altogether an hymeneal month,
but it was not till November that Lady Mary Palliser became the wife
of Frank Tregear. It was postponed a little, perhaps, in order that
the Silverbridges,--as they were now called,--might be present. The
Silverbridges, who were now quite Darby and Joan, had gone to the
States when the Session had been brought to a close early in August,
and had remained there nearly three months. Isabel had taken infinite
pleasure in showing her English husband to her American friends, and
the American friends had no doubt taken a pride in seeing so glorious
a British husband in the hands of an American wife. Everything was
new to Silverbridge, and he was happy in his new possession. She too
enjoyed it infinitely, and so it happened that they had been unwilling
to curtail their sojourn. But in November they had to return, because
Mary had declared that her marriage should be postponed till it could
be graced by the presence of her elder brother.

The marriage of Silverbridge
had been August. There had been a manifest intention that it should
be so. Nobody knew with whom this originated. Mrs. Boncassen had probably
been told that it ought to be so, and Mr. Boncassen had been willing
to pay the bill. External forces had perhaps operated. The Duke had
simply been passive and obedient. There had however been a general
feeling that the bride of the heir of the house of Omnium should be
produced to the world amidst a blare of trumpets and a glare of torches.
So it had been. But both the Duke and Mary were determined that this
other wedding should be different. It was to take place at Matching,
and none would be present but they who were staying in the house,
or who lived around,--such as tenants and dependants. Four clergymen
united their forces to tie Isabel to her husband, one of whom was
a bishop, one a canon, and the two others royal chaplains; but there
was only to be the Vicar of the parish at Matching. And indeed there
were no guests in the house except the two bridesmaids and Mr. and
Mrs. Finn. As to Mrs. Finn, Mary had made a request, and then the
Duke had suggested that the husband should be asked to accompany his
wife.

It was very pretty. The church itself is pretty, standing in
the park, close to the ruins of the old Priory, not above three hundred
yards from the house. And they all walked, taking the broad pathway
through the ruins, going under that figure of Sir Guy which Silverbridge
had pointed out to Isabel when they had been whispering there together.
The Duke led the way with his girl upon his arm. The two bridesmaids
followed. Then Silverbridge and his wife, with Phineas and his wife.
Gerald and the bridegroom accompanied them, belonging as it were to
the same party! It was very rustic;--almost improper! "This is altogether
wrong, you know," said Gerald. "You should appear coming from some
other part of the world, as if you were almost unexpected. You ought
not to have been in the house at all, and certainly should have gone
under some disguise."

There had been rich presents too on this occasion,
but they were shown to none except to Mrs. Finn and the bridesmaids,--and
perhaps to the favoured servants in the house. At any rate there was
nothing said of them in the newspapers. One present there was,--given
not to the bride but to the bridegroom,--which he showed to no one
except to her. This came to him only on the morning of his marriage,
and the envelope containing it bore the postmark of Sedbergh. He knew
the handwriting well before he opened the parcel. It contained a small
signet-ring with his crest, and with it there were but a few words
written on a scrap of paper. "I pray that you may be happy. This was
to have been given to you long ago, but I kept it back because of
that decision." He showed the ring to Mary and told her it had come
from Lady Mabel;--but the scrap of paper no one saw but himself.

Perhaps
the matter most remarkable in the wedding was the hilarity of the
Duke. One who did not know him well might have said that he was a
man with few cares, and who now took special joy in the happiness
of his children,--who was thoroughly contented to see them marry after
their own hearts. And yet, as he stood there on the altar-steps giving
his daughter to that new son and looking first at his girl, and then
at his married son, he was reminding himself of all that he had suffered.

After
the breakfast,--which was by no means a grand repast and at which
the cake did not look so like an ill-soldered silver castle as that
other construction had done,--the happy couple were sent away in a
modest chariot to the railway station, and not above half-a-dozen
slippers were thrown after them. There were enough for luck,--or perhaps
there might have been luck even without them, for the wife thoroughly
respected her husband, as did the husband his wife. Mrs. Finn, when
she was alone with Phineas, said a word or two about Frank Tregear.
"When she first told me of her engagement I did not think it possible
that she should marry him. But after he had been with me I felt sure
that he would succeed."

"Well, sir," said Silverbridge to the Duke
when they were out together in the park that afternoon, "what do you
think about him?"

"I think he is a manly young man."

"He is certainly
that. And then he knows things and understands them. It was never
a surprise to me that Mary should have been so fond of him."

"I do
not know that one ought to be surprised at anything. Perhaps what
surprised me most was that he should have looked so high. There seemed
to be so little to justify it. But now I will accept that as courage
which I before regarded as arrogance." He dared
not follow you, but he tried to hire some one else to do it--that I know."

It was already late. Alan dozed off, despite his uneasiness, for he had had a tiring day. Suddenly
he awoke and sat bolt upright. There was a commotion in the street. The innkeeper was peeping
out through a hole in the solid shutters. "It is the clerk again," he said. "He is haranguing
the people."

Alan slipped out and came up on the outskirts of the crowd. He caught the words "fool's gold"
in Simon's shrill voice, and then the crowd began to mutter, "Die Hexe! Die Hexe!"

Alan waited to hear no more. He knew that this meant that sinister thing, a witch-hunt. If
Simon had connected Stefano's house and his reputed hoard of gold with his disastrous experiment,
and possibly suspected Josian's existence there, it was a time for quick thought and bold action.
He raced down the street leading to the rear of the house, vaulted the wall and found old Maddalena
unlocking the small side door.

"Get her away," he said in a low voice, "at once--there is danger!"

The old woman pointed up the stairs, and Alan went leaping over them to find the girl hooded
and cloaked for the journey in the small room, now bare and cold as the moonlight. Her soft
light steps kept pace with his to the garden gate; he hurried her and Maddalena out, bidding
them walk away quietly. Then he turned back, heaped a pile of straw and rubbish under the stairs,
and flung the contents of a lighted charcoal brazier on it. As the fire blazed up he heard
the snarl of the mob coming down the street which passed the front entrance. He could hear
words in the incoherent shouting- -"Die Hexe! Die Hexe! Brennen--brennen!"

As he shut the gate and slipped away he found Martin Bouvin keeping pace with him, "Do you
know what has happened?" the little man asked. "The guests at the Prince's banquet came late
into the street and found Simon raving about his gold. They questioned him, and he told them
of a mysterious house where an old witch dwelt and changed into a young girl at sunset. The
Prince knew the house. He asked Master Stefano what it meant. When he got no answer but a jest
he struck Stefano down and rode over him. He is dead. Then the people caught up the cry and
began to talk of burning the witch. They are all out there now, and the Prince is trying to
make his guard go in after the gold. That was a good thought of yours, setting fire to the
house: they will stay to watch it. I will go with you if I may, Master. If Stefano is gone
Goslar is no good place for me!"

Alan remembered now that the jester had spoken in terms of friendship of Martin Bouvin. In
any case they were now nearing the gate where the man stood waiting with the horses. Josian
and Maddalena were already mounted. As the servant held Alan's stirrup the Englishman looked
down and saw under the hood the black piercing eyes and thin face of Giovanni.

"It is all right," whispered the Milanese with a glance at Bouvin. "He can ride the pack-horse.
His only reason for staying here was Stefano's business."

The sleepy guard let them out without a look, and they rode on at a good pace toward the mountains.
Josian had not said one word.

"Are you afraid, Princess?" Alan asked presently.

She shook her head. When she heard the story of the jester's death she was less shaken than
Alan had feared. "He told me last night that he could not live long," she said sadly. "I knew
that I should never see him again in this world."

At last they halted for an hour beside a little spring. Josian looked back at the gray pointed
roofs and towers of Goslar. "Al-an," she said, "what was that light in the sky?"

"It was your tower," Alan answered. "No one will ever live there again, since you cannot."

Alan marveled at Josian's self-possession during the rough journey. She obeyed orders like
a child, showed no fear in the most perilous passes, and fared as roughly as the others did,
with quiet endurance. Soon, however, they had crossed the frontier and met the party of travelers
in whose company were the London merchant and his wife and son.

Then began days and weeks of travel, the like of which Alan had not known. He had gone from
one place to another in such company as offered, many a time, but here were folk who knew every
road and every inn, beguiled the hours with songs and jests and stories, and made the time
pass like a holiday. He found that his knowledge of the out-of-door world interested Josian
more than the ballads and tales of the others. He often rode at her side for an hour or more,
pointing out to her the secret quick life of woodland and meadow, and finding perhaps that
she already knew the bird, squirrel, marmot or hare, by another name. "London is well enough,"
he said one day, "but 'tis not for me. I could never live grubbing in the dark there like a
mouldiwarp."

Josian's delicate brows drew together. "Mouldi--what strange beast is that, Al-an?" and Alan
laughed and explained that it was a mole.

It was at noon of one of the long fragrant days of early summer, while the travelers rested
in the forest, that Josian spoke of the jester once more. In the green stillness of the deep
woods, birds singing and shy delicate blossoms gemming the moss, the fierce and savage past
was like a dream.

"Father Stephen gave me a packet that last night," she said. "He gave Giovanni gold for the
journey, but this parcel he said I must carry myself and show to you when I thought fit. I
wonder what it can be?"

Alan took the packet and turned it over. It was sealed with a device of Greek letters.

"That is my father's signet," the girl added. "Here is his ring," and she drew from under her
bodice a man's ring, hung on a slender gold chain, the stone a great emerald carved with the
Greek "AEI"--"Always." Alan cut the cord of the packet and handed it to her. "It is not for
me to open it," he said.

She unfolded, tenderly and reverently, the wrappings of parchment and oiled silk, and disclosed
a compact manuscript closely written on the thinnest leaves, in a firm clear hand. Lifting
two or three of the pages she read eagerly and then looked up, her eyes alight with wondering joy.

"Here are all the most precious of his writings, Al-an!" she cried, "the secrets that were
in all the books that were lost--written clearly so that I myself can read them! Oh, it is
like having him come back to speak to us--and Father Stephen, too--here by ourselves in the
forest! And now you will know all the secrets of his work, for they are written here."

Alan's face had gone whiter than the parchment. Here indeed was the treasure he had come to
seek. And it was Josian's free gift.

But that was not all. "Josian," he said, not putting out his hand even to touch the precious
parcel, "you must not give away these manuscripts so lightly. They are worth much gold, child--they
are a rich dowry for you. You must wait until you see Tomaso the physician, and he will tell
you what is best to do with them."

She shook her head. "Oh, n-o," she said. "Father Stephen said that you would make good use
of them, and had earned them--but I think he knew quite well what you would say. Perhaps some
day you will feel differently."

Dame Cicely of the Abbey Farm welcomed Josian in due time as a daughter. When she and Alan
had been married about three months Josian was surveying a panel of just-completed embroidery
in which all the colors in exquisite proportion blended in a gold-green jeweled arabesque.
Alan came up behind her and caught the sunlight through it. He asked to borrow it, and reproduced
the design in painted glass. That was the first window which he made for York Minster.

Among the formulae in the scripts which were Josian's dowry were several for stained glass
and the making of colors to be used therein. By means of one of these it became possible to
make glass of wonderful rich hues, through which the light came white, as if no glass were
there. This is one of the secrets known to the workers of the Middle Ages and now lost; but
in old windows there still remain fragments of the glass.

If to-day certain precious bits of glass, ruby-red, emerald-green, sapphire-blue, topaz-yellow,
set in the windows of old cathedrals, could speak, they would say proudly that they are the
work of Alan of York and Josian, the daughter of Archiater, the philosopher.

NEW ALTARS

 I Publius Curtius, these many years dwelling
 Among these barbarians, a foe and a prefect,
    To Those whom they worship unreasoning,
       Gods of the Land, I raise this new altar.

 To Thee whom the wild hares in silence foregathering
 Worship with ears erect in the moonlight,
    (And vanish at sound of a footstep approaching)
       God of the Downs, I pour this libation.

 To Thee whom the trout in the rainbow foam drifting
 Behold in the sunlight through wet leafage sifting
     (And vanish like shadows of clouds in the water)
         God of the Streams, I pay this my tribute.

 To Thee whom the skylark, in rapture ascending
 Adores in his dithyramb perfect, unending,
     (And vanishes in the high heaven still singing)
         God of the Mist, I utter this prayer.

 To Ye whom my children, born here in my mansion,
 Reverence beyond the gods of their fathers,
     And love as they love their own mother,
         Gods of the Land, I build ye this temple!

XII

COLD HARBOR

Wilfrid, the potter, stood with his wife and children, looking at what was left of a little
old cottage. Fire had left it a heap of ashes and half- burned timbers and rubbish. The red
roof-tiles glowed like embers of dead centuries.

"I'd never ha' turned the old man out," he said pensively, "but now he's gone and the cot's
gone too, we'll see what's under this end of Cold Harbor."

Edwitha, his wife, looked up, her eyes sparkling through quick tears.

"I was hoping you'd say that, Wilfrid," she said with eager wistfulness. "I've longed so to
know--but he'd lived there since our fathers and mothers were children. 'Twould ha' been like
taking the soul out of his body to drive him away."

She was a slender, pretty creature, almost as childlike in her way of speaking as if she had
been no older than Dorothea or Alfred. The children listened with pleased excitement commingled
with a certain awe. Gaffer Bartram had seemed as much a part of their lives as the sun or the
wind or the old pollard willow. When he was strong enough he taught Alfred to snare rabbits
and catch moles; when rheumatism crippled him he sat by the door making baskets and telling
Dorothy rhymes and tales of seventy years ago. Then first his old gray cat Susan had disappeared,
after that the old man himself, and last the cottage caught fire and burned. And father was
actually giving orders to the men to dig up the garden and see what lay under it.

There is a mysterious immovable setness about the Sussex Downs. What is there seems to have
been there always. The oldest man cannot say when the great white hollows were first scooped
out of the chalk, or the dewponds made on the heights. Ever since there were people in Sussex--whether
it is five thousand years ago or fifteen thousand--the short wind-swept turf has been grazed
by woolly flocks. Before ever a Norman castle held a vantage- height the tansy grew dark and
rank in cottage gardens and the children went gathering woodruff and speedwell and the elfin
gold of "little socks and shoes." Any change, good or bad, is a loss to some one--the land
is so full of the life of the past.

Wilfrid and Edwitha well understood this, though they would never have put it into fine phrases.
They could not have said it except to each other, and for that there was no need of speech.
Because of it they had left the old man at peace in his cottage, and even after he was dead
they put off the uncovering of what might lie under the soil of his garden and his orchard.

Wilfrid's pottery had grown up in the last ten years near a claybank, not far from the boundary
between his father's land and Edwitha's old home. An irregular terrace broke the slope above
it, and here the tilled land had come to an end at one point because the plows came hard against
a buried Roman wall. Not being able to break up the solid masonry of Roman builders done a
thousand years before, Wilfrid's father had cleared away the soil, roofed over the ruin which
he found, and used it to store grain. This was Cold Harbor.

As Wilfrid's pottery prospered he found another use for the building. There was no tavern thereabouts,
and when the Saxon abbey five or six miles away could house no more guests, or his workmen
could not all find lodging in the neighborhood, it was possible to shelter there. The roof
was weather-tight, a wood fire could be built on the stone hearth, and with fresh straw from
Borstall Farm for beds, provisions from the same source, and their own cloaks for covering,
travelers found themselves fairly comfortable.

Like others of its kind the building came to be known as "Cold Harbor," a "herbergage" or lodging,
without food or heat being provided. Sometimes an enterprising innkeeper would take possession
of such a place after a time and furnish it as an inn.

At this very time, unknown to Wilfrid, some of his friends were discussing such a possibility
as they rode up from Dover. Gilbert Gay the merchant, his wife Thomasyn and his son Nicholas
were returning from France, and in their company were Alan of York and Josian his wife, Guy
Bouverel the goldsmith, and others. West of Canterbury they came up with a stout bright-eyed
little man who looked as if he had fed well all his life, and was called Martin Bouvin.

"What luck, Martin?" asked Master Gay. The little man spread his hands in a gesture of comic
despair. All the tavern-sites seemed to be held by some religious house that owned the land,
or some nobleman who allowed the innkeeper to use his device as a sign.

"There ought to be an inn there in Sussex where Wilfrid's pottery is," observed the goldsmith.
"When I halt there to see Wilfrid I find nine times out of ten that I must e'en quarter myself
on him. D'ye remember that old place he calls Cold Harbor? That would be a proper house for
a tavern."

"It is not large enough," objected the merchant. "Any tavern worth the name would need more
room than that within a twelvemonth. Still, other buildings could be added. If you and the
potter can come to an agreement, Bouvin, I will aid you in fitting up the building and you
may repay me in dinners. There's not a cook this side Rouen who can match your chestnut soup."

"Made with the yolk of an egg and a little wine of Xeres?" asked Guy with interest. "Giovanni
made it so for us once."

The merchant waved a protesting hand. "No, no, no, no--lemon, man, lemon, with white stock,
pepper, salt, a little parsley. Sherry is an excellent drink, but not in chestnut soup, I pray
you."

"What matters it," asked Alan innocently, "so the food is wholesome and pleasant?

"That is what might be expected of you, you Northern barbarian," laughed Guy. "Where did you
get your cunning, Martin?"

The little man's beady black eyes twinkled knowingly. "A true cook, Master Bouverel, takes
all good things where he finds them. I make bouillabaisse for those who like it, but--between
you and me--Norman matelote of fish is just as good. I cook pigeon broth as they do in Boulogne,
I make black bean soup as they do in Spain. I was born in Boulogne, but I have cooked in many
other places--in Avignon, where they say the angels taught them how to cook--Messina, Paris,
Genoa, all over Aquitaine with the routiers. Perigueux is a very agreeable place--you know
the truffles there? I cook sometimes cutlets of lamb and veal in a casserole with truffles,
mushrooms, bacon in strips, a lemon sliced, shallots, some chicken stock, and herbs--yes, that
is very good. Oh, I can cook for French, Norman, Gascon, Spanish, Lombard--any people. Only
in Goslar. That was one horreeble place, Goslar! The people eat pork and cabbage, pork and
cabbage, and black bread--chut!" He made a grimace at the memory.

"I fear you will find some of that sort among our English travelers," said Gilbert Gay amusedly.
"Not all of them will appreciate--what was that you gave us in Paris? epigrammes of lamb, the
cutlets dipped in chicken stock and fried. Swine are still among our chief domestic animals."

"Oh, as to that," said the chef quickly, "I am not too proud to cook for people who like simple
things--meat broiled and roasted with plain bread. And do you know that one must be a very
fine cook to do such work well? When I am alone, which is not often, I prepare for myself fresh
vegetables, broil a fish that has not forgotten the water,--and with a roll and a little fruit,
that is my dinner. The soteltes at kings' tables, all colored sugar and pastry and isinglass--they
are only good for people who can eat peacock, and those are very few. Do you know, Master Gay,
what is the great secret of my art? To know what is good, and not spoil it."

"I foresee," laughed the merchant, "that we shall all be making excuses to come down from London
if you stay in Sussex with your saucepans. But hey! there are the towers of the abbey already,
and it is not yet mid- afternoon. Let us ride on to see Wilfrid and find out whether he approves
of our fine plan."

While this discussion of the noble art of cookery was going on miles away, Wilfrid and Edwitha,
with no thought of inns, were watching the laborers digging where Wilfrid thought the rest
of the building ought to be. In his travels he had seen other Roman houses better preserved
than this, and by inquiring of learned men had gained some idea of Roman civilization. He had
been told that Roman officials in England often built villas in places rather like this terrace,
and since the building already unearthed was the end of the walls in one direction, the rest
of the villa might be found under the cottage of old Bartram and his orchard, garden and cow-byre.

No other house in the neighborhood was as old as that cottage. It was built of beams put together
without nails and filled in with a rude wattle-work plastered thickly with coat after coat
of mud. Instead of being thatched like most houses of its kind the roof had been covered with
fine red tiles,--possibly Roman work. It seemed that the soil must have washed in over the
ruins of the Roman building so very long ago that there had been time for trees to grow above it.

Thus Wilfrid reasoned. As his laborers dug and moiled and sweated under the hot clear sun,
he watched with lively interest for whatever they might turn up. It is to be feared that Edwitha's
maids were less carefully looked after than usual after the work began, and the children spent
every minute they could in following their mother or their father about to see what was going
to happen.

There was another reason besides curiosity for keeping watch of the work. If any pottery should
be discovered, Wilfrid did not wish to have it broken by a careless mattock.

Then Dorothy came running from the house to find her mother and father bending over a newly-unearthed
Roman wall. "Father!" she cried, "a man is come to see you!"

"Oh!" said Wilfrid, not very eagerly. He brushed some of the earth from his clothes with a
handful of weeds and went toward the gate, where a horseman sat awaiting him. As he came nearer
the man dismounted and came toward him with outstretched hand.

"Alan!" cried the potter joyfully. "I heard you were abroad. Come in, and I'll send for Edwitha."

"Not so fast," said his guest. "I am but a harbinger. Guy Bouverel and Master Gay the merchant
with his wife and son, and some others, are coming along. We'll stay at the Abbey, but we rode
on to see you first. I've my wife with me, Wilfrid."

"That's news indeed," said the potter cordially. "And who may she be? Some foreign damsel you
met in your pilgrimage?"

"That's one way of saying it," answered Alan smiling. "You shall see her and judge for yourself.
How's all here?"

Wilfrid smiled rather sheepishly. "You and your wife must come and stay with us," he insisted.
"We'll make you welcome, spite of being a bit upset. Edwitha has been taking holiday. We're
digging up the farm to see what's at the other end of Cold Harbor, lad."

"Make no ado about us," Alan protested. "It's partly about Cold Harbor that we came--but here
they all are, upon my life!"

A merry company of travelers rode up the lane, and as they dismounted Edwitha came over the
little footpath across the field, with the children clinging to her hands--a little embarrassed
to find so many folk arriving and she not there. The boy scampered up to his father piping
loudly, "Father, come you quick--we've found a picture in the ground!"

"What's all this?" asked Master Gay. And after Wilfrid's explanation nothing would do but that
they all should go immediately to see what had come to light. When they beheld it the younger
men could not keep from taking a hand themselves. With brooms of twigs, and potsherds, and
water from the well in Cold Harbor, they industriously swept and scraped and washed the pavement
which the men had now partly uncovered.

It was a mosaic floor of tiny blocks of red, black, yellow, white, brown, cream and slate-blue,
set in cement so strong that not an inch of the fine even surface had warped. It was not a
large pavement, and might have been the floor of a small dining or sitting-room so placed as
to command a view of the valley. A part of one wall remained. It had been plastered and then
covered with a finer plaster which was frescoed with a row of painted pillars against the deep
marvelous red of Pompeii. The design of the floor was not at first clear. The edge was decorated
with a conventional pattern in gray and white. The corners were cut off by diagonal lines making
an eight-sided central space. This was outlined by a guilloche, or border of intertwining bands
of brilliant colors. Inside this again was a circle divided into alternate square and triangular
spaces with still brighter borders, containing each some bird or animal. In the central space
was a seated figure playing on a harp, while around him were packed in a close group a lion,
a ram, a bull, a goat, a crab, fishes, and other figures. Nobody at first saw what it could be.

"If I mistake not," said the little stout man, Martin Bouvin, at last, "it is Sir Orpheus playing
to the beasts."

"To be sure!" cried Guy Bouverel. "Do you know books as well as cooking- pots, O man of the
oldest profession?"

Martin grinned. "I heard a song about that once," he answered, "and I have never forgotten
it. It was a lucky song--for some folk."

It was fortunate that at that time of year the sun does not set until after eight o'clock,
for no one could have borne to leave that pavement without seeing the whole of it. The children,
quite forgotten for once in their lives, grubbed in the piles of earth and found bewitching
bronze lion-heads and ornamental knobs and handles, and pictured tiles. At last they all went
in to a very late supper. All the guests could be sheltered at Wilfrid's home if the young
men were satisfied to lodge in Cold Harbor.

"It is like finding out the people who lived here when the land was young," said Wilfrid, his
eyes very bright.

"And there were also the men who made the dewponds," mused Master Gay.

"And there were those Druids of whom my father told me," said Josian wonderingly. "This is
like a fairy tale, Al-an. Is York the same?"

"Brother Basil said once that our England is a land of lost kingdoms," Alan answered her. "I
see what he meant."

Excavation went on during the following days until all the pavements of the old Roman house
had been cleared. The two others were larger but not so fine as the first they had uncovered.
One was of stone blocks laid in a sort of checkerboard pattern, and the other of mosaic in
a conventional pattern of black and gray and brown and red. They found that under these floors
there was an open space about two feet high. The tiled floor which was covered with the mosaic
was supported by a multitude of dwarf pillars of stone and brick. This space, although they
did not know it, was the hypocaust or heating chamber of the colonial Roman house, and had
been kept filled with hot air from a furnace. Beams of wood and heaps of tiles indicated that
there had been an upper storey of wood. This in fact was the case, the Romans having a strong
objection to sleeping on the ground floor.

Now there was no more doubt that Cold Harbor might be made into a well- appointed tavern. With
a little masonry to reenforce them the walls would form a base for a half-timbered house roofed
with tiles from Wilfrid's pottery. The largest room would be the general guest-room in which
the tables would be set for all comers, and those who could not afford better accommodation
might sleep there on benches or on the floor. For guests of higher station, especially those
who had ladies in their party, private chambers and dining-rooms would be provided. Master
Gay intended to furnish a suite for himself and any of his friends who came that way.

"And by the way," said Guy suddenly, "Cold Harbor will never do for a name. What shall you
call the inn, Martin?"

Bouvin snapped his fingers. "I have thought and thought until my head goes to split. I would
call it Boulogne Harbor, but there is no picture you could make of that."

"'Mouth' is the English for harbor," suggested Wilfrid. "But all the country people would call
it 'Bull-and-Mouth."

Padraig began sketching with a bit of charcoal on the broken wall. "Make it that and I'll paint
the sign for ye. 'Bull-and-Mouth'--every hungry man will see the meaning o' that."

With a dozen strokes he sketched a huge mouth about to swallow a bull. This, done with a fine
show of color, became the sign of the tavern. Martin never tired of explaining the pun to those
who asked. Even before the guest-rooms were finished, travelers began arriving, drawn by the
fame of Martin's savory and succulent dishes. Pilgrims, merchants, knights, squires, showmen,
soldiers, minstrels, scholars, sea-captains--they came and came again. Almost every subject
in church or state, from Peter's pence to the Third Crusade, from the Constitutions of Clarendon
to clipped money, was discussed at Martin's tables, with point and freedom. Cold Harbor entered
upon a new life and became part of the foundation of a new empire.

GALLEY SONG

 Amber, copper, jet and tin,
 Anklet, bracelet, necklace, pin,--
 That is the way the trades begin
   Over the pony's back.

 Mother-o'-pearl or malachite,
 Ebony black or ivory white
 Lade the dromond's rushing flight
   Over Astarte's track.

 Crucifix or mangonel,
 Steel for sword or bronze for bell,--
 That is the way we trafficking sell,
   Out of the tempest's wrack.

 Marble, porcelain, tile or brick,
 Hemlock, vitriol, arsenic--
 Souls or bodies barter quick--
   Masters, what d'ye lack?

XIII

THE WISDOM OF THE GALLEYS

It was Nicholas Gay's last night at home. At dawn his father's best ship, the Sainte Spirite,
would weigh anchor for the longest eastward voyage she had ever undertaken. His father's brother,
Gervase Gaillard of Bordeaux, was going out in charge of the venture. Gilbert Gay, the London
merchant, who had altered his name though not his long-sighted French mind in his twenty years
of England, thought this an excellent time for his eighteen- year-old son to see the world.

Since Nicholas could remember, he had known the wharves of the Thames and the changeful drama
of London Pool. He had been twice to Normandy, but to a lad French by birth, that was hardly
a foreign land. Now he was to see countries neither English nor French--some of them not even
Christian. Half Spain and all the north coast of Africa were Moslem. Sicily and Sardinia had
Saracen traditions. This would be his first sight of the great sea-road from Gibraltar to Byzantium.

During the past three years Gilbert Gay had been often absent, and the boy had taken responsibility
of the sort that makes a man. With the keen aquiline French profile he had a skin almost as
fair as a girl's, and yellow-brown waving hair. The steady gray eyes and firm lips, however,
had nothing girlish about them.

As luck had it these last hours were crowded with visitors. Robert Edrupt, the wool-merchant,
and David Saumond, the mason, were taking passage in the Sainte Spirite. Guy Bouverel had a
share in her cargo, and came for a word about that and to bid Nicholas good-by. Brother Ambrosius,
a solemn- faced portly monk, had letters to send to Rome. Lady Adelicia Giffard came to ask
that inquiry be made for her husband, who had gone on pilgrimage more than a year before, and
had not been heard of for many months. The poor soul was as nearly distraught as a woman could
be. She begged Gervase Gaillard to ask all the pilgrims and merchants he met whether in their
travels they had seen or heard of Sir Stephen Giffard, and should any trace of him be found,
to send a messenger to her without delay. She was wealthy, and promised liberal reward to any
one who could help her in the search. It was her great fear that the knight had been taken
prisoner by the Moslems.

"I think that you must have heard of it in that case," said Gilbert Gay gently, "since these
marauders ever demand ransom. I pray you remember, my lady, that there are a thousand chances
whereby in these unsettled times a man may be delayed, or his letters fail to reach you. 'Tis
not well to brood over vain rumors."

"I know," whimpered the poor lady, "but I cannot--I cannot bear that he should be a captive
and suffering, and I with hoarded gold that I have no heart to look upon. 'Tis cruel."

"Holy Church," observed Brother Ambrosius, "hath always need of our hearts and of our gold,
lady. Peace comes to the spirit that hath learned the sweet uses of submission. To dote on
the things of the flesh is unpleasing to God."

"When I was in Spain," said Edrupt, "I heard a monk preaching a new religion. He urged his
hearers to aid in rescuing the captives held in Moslem slavery. 'Tis said he has saved many."

"Were it not well," pursued Brother Ambrosius as if he had not heard, "to think upon the glorious
opportunity of a captive to bear witness to his faith? We read how angels delivered the apostles
from prison, and how Saint Paul in his bonds exhorted and rebuked his people, to the edification
of many."

"True," commented Gilbert Gay rather dryly, "but we are not all Saint Pauls. And I have never
known of God sending angels to do work that He might properly expect of men and women."

This was a new idea to Brother Ambrosius. Not finding a place in his mind for one just then,
he looked meek and said nothing, and presently took his leave.

"Saint Paul was a tentmaker, was he not?" queried Guy Bouverel when the door had closed upon
the churchman. "Had he rowed in the galleys I doubt whether we should have had those Epistles."

Nicholas recalled this conversation the next day, as the sturdy little ship of English oak
filled her great sails and went blithely out upon the widening estuary of the Thames. The last
of the dear London landmarks faded into the gray soft sky. Soon the sailors would begin to
look for Sheerness and the Forelands, Dungeness, Beachy Head. Nicholas leaned on the rail above
the dancing morning waters and remembered it all.

There was his mother's sweet pale face under the white coif, her busy fingers completing a
last bit of stitchery for him. There was his father's fine, keen, kindly face bent over his
account-books and coffers. There was pretty Genevieve, his sister, with her husband, Crispin
Eyre. And there were the comrades of his boyhood, and the prating monk, and the unhappy lady
with her white face framed in rich velvets and furs, and her piteous beseeching hands that
were never still. Those faces, in the glow of the fire and the shine of tall candles in their
silver sconces, were to be with him often in the months to come.

Edrupt came up just as a long Venetian galley went plowing out to sea, the great oars flashing
in the sunlight, one rank above another. "They do not have to pray for a fair wind, those Venetians,"
Nicholas commented idly.

"That galley's past praying for anything," Edrupt said grimly. "You may be glad that your men
fear neither wind nor seas--nor you. 'Tis an ill thing to sail the seas with those who serve
only through fear."

Nicholas had not thought of it in that way. He knew, of course, that the slaves who rowed the
racing galleys were the offscouring of mankind, desperate men, drawn from all nations. It was
as much as two men could do to handle one oar, and all must pull in unison as a huge machine.
The Venetian dromond was to other merchant-ships as the dromedary to other camels. To make
the speed required the rowers must put forth their whole strength, hour after hour, day after day.

Any work which makes men into parts of a machine is not likely to improve them as men. When
they have no love for their work and no hope of reward, and do not even speak the same language,
the one motive which can be depended upon to keep them going is fear. The whip of the overseer
bred festering, burning hatred, but it kept the sweeps from breaking their monotonous unceasing
motion. If the voyage were quick, the profits were the greater, and no one cared for anything else.

Thinking of the hard sea-bitten faces of the galley-slaves Nicholas rejoiced that rather than
live so the crew of the Sainte Spirite would every man of them choose a clean death at sea.

Some days later it seemed as if they were fated to die so. A Biscay tempest caught them, and
from dark to daylight they were buffeted by the giant battledores of wind and sea. Nicholas
spent the sleepless hours in lending a hand and cheering the men as he could.

At last they sighted the great Rock of Gibraltar, fifteen hundred feet of it clear against
the sky, like the gateway pillar of another world. Between Europe and Africa they passed into
the blue Mediterranean,--blue with the salty sparkle beloved of all sea-lovers since Ulysses.
Light warm winds, the scent of orange-groves and rose-gardens, a sky only less deep in its
azure splendor than the sea itself--it seemed indeed another world.

But the Sainte Spirite had not come whole out of her struggle with the powers of the abyss.
Timbers were sadly strained, a mast was gone, every man on board was weary and muscle-sore.
And then a Levantine gale drove the crippled merchantman down on the Barbary coast.

The blackness of that storm ended, for Nicholas Gay, in a plunge into the black waters and
a glimpse of the high lantern of his father's ship dancing above the tossing foam like a witch-fire,
for an instant before she went down. When he came to himself he was lying on hot sand in the
sunshine, and Edrupt and David Saumond were bending anxiously over him.

Half the seamen were gone; so was the captain; so was all of the cargo. Gervase Gaillard had
been injured by a falling mast and was helpless. The coast was strange to them all, but the
old merchant and Edrupt made a guess that it was a part of Morocco somewhere near the town
of Fez. Food they had none; water they might find; and the merchants had not lost quite all
they had in the wreck. Some gold and jewels they had saved, secured about their persons. These
would pay the passage of the company to London- -if they had luck.

They were considering what to do next when a body of some twoscore horsemen swept down upon
them. The leader might have been either Turk or Frank. He was as dark as a Saracen and wore
the chain-mail, scimitar and light helmet of the heathen, but he spoke Levantine rather too
well for a Moor, and with a different intonation.

"Who are you?" he asked curtly. Nicholas Gay stood up, not yet quite steady on his feet.

"We are London merchant folk," he said, "from the wrecked ship Sainte Spirite, whereof my father,
Gilbert Gay, was owner. My uncle here is our chief man, but as you see, he is injured and cannot
move. If we may get food and lodging until we are able to return to England, we will requite
it freely."

"London," repeated the soldier. "A parcel of London traders, eh?" He spoke a few words to the
Moor who rode next him, in another language. "This is the domain of Yusuf of the Almohades,"
he went on, "and we make no terms with the enemies of God. Yet we condemn no man to starve.
Ye shall have food and lodging so long as ye remain with us. Doubtless ye are honest and will
pay, but in this barbarous land there are many thieves. Therefore we will take charge of such
wealth as ye have. As for that old man, he cannot live to reach his home. Abu Hassan!"

A trooper spurred toward the old merchant and thrust him through with his lance. He half rose,
groaned and fell back, dead. Others, dismounting, seized upon the astonished and indignant
castaways, and took from them with the deftness of practiced hands whatever they had of value.
This was too much for the Breton and English sailors. They would have fought it out then and
there. But Nicholas spoke quickly so that only those nearest him heard.

"There is no gain in being killed here one by one. Wait and be silent. Pass the word to the rest."

When the prisoners had been herded into a compact company in the center of the mounted troop,
the leader chirruped to his horse. "It grows late," he said. "Y'Allah!" And at the point of
the lance the captives were driven forward.

They were taken through the crowded narrow streets of a squalid town and left in a walled enclosure
where two negroes brought them an earthen jar of water and some sort of cooked grain in a large
bowl. The sun blazed down upon their shelterless heads and flies hummed about the filth in
the unclean place. Nicholas, when their hunger had been partly satisfied and there was no more
to eat or drink, addressed himself to the others in a cool and quiet voice.

"Friends, it is like we are to be sold into slavery among the infidels. If each man is left
to shift for himself they may break us. If we stand by one another and keep our faith we may
yet win home to England. They may not separate us at first, and I have been thinking that if
they find out the value of a company of men freely choosing to work together in harmony, they
will hardly separate us at all. But we must obey their will, we must keep order among ourselves,
and above all, we must seem to have given up all hope of escape. What say you?"

Edrupt spoke first. "I'm with you, lad. 'Tis our one chance of seeing home again, I do think."

David Saumond's shrewd eyes were scanning the faces of the sailors. "I'll no be the last to
join ye," he said. "But all must agree. One man out would make a hole i' the dyke."

A big Breton sailor stepped forward. "Kadoc of Saint Malo sticks to his ship," he growled,
and drew with his forefinger a line in the dust. "Who's next?"

One after another, but with little hesitation, the men crossed the line. All had some idea
of what awaited them in the Moorish provinces. It was no new thing for captives of European
blood to be sold as slaves. Gangs of them toiled on canals, walls, fortresses, in grain-fields,
on board galleys. Those leaders of Islam who urged a holy war sowed fortifications wherever
they went. The need for slave labor for such work was greater than the supply. Much of the
slave population was unfit for anything but the simplest and rudest tasks, and could be kept
at work only by the constant use of the whip.

All the tales Nicholas had heard of slavery crowded into his mind in the first moments of captivity.
Once a black-browed Sicilian had told of a night of blood and flame, when the slaves of a galley,
mad with toil, privation and hatred, killed their masters and attempted to seize the ship,--and
almost succeeded. "Slaves cannot unite," the Sicilian ended contemptuously. "There is always
a Judas." But Gilbert Gay had chosen his men for this voyage with especial care. Every man
of them, Nicholas believed, could be trusted.

They had never dreamed of anything like the next few days--the filth, the degradation, the
cruelty. Nicholas was glad, when half-naked Moslem boys called them names from a safe distance,
that the others could not understand. The insults of an Oriental are primitive and plain--and
very old. Nicholas had a trick of absorbing languages, and already knew half a score of outlandish
tongues and dialects.

Not only the townspeople but their Moslem fellow-slaves held the Kafirs in contempt. Their
rations were sometimes food condemned by the Moslem faith. Edrupt's cool common sense and David's
dry humor were of valiant service in those days. The Scot averred that better men than Mahomet
had been bred on barley bannocks, and that the flat coarse cakes of the Berbers were as near
them as a heathen could be expected to come. He also warned them that Moses knew what he was
about when he forbade pork to his people, and that the pigs that ran in the streets of an African
town were very different eating from the beech-fed hogs of Kent. From a Jewish physician for
whom he had once built a secret treasure-vault he had picked up a rough-and- ready knowledge
of medicine which was of very considerable value.

One morning they were all marched off, in charge of a greasy indifferent- looking Turk, to
work on a canal embankment. The garden of an emir's favorite was to have a new bath-pavilion.
Here the great strength of Kadoc, the hard clean muscle and ready resourcefulness of Edrupt,
and the Scotch mason's experience in the ways of stones and waters, set the pace for the rest.
The seamen studied how to use their strength to the best advantage as they had once studied
the sky and the sea. They moved together to the tune of their own chanteys, and the Turk discovered
that this one gang was worth any two others on the ground. When questioned, Nicholas replied
briefly that it was the way of his people.

The foreign-looking officer smiled incredulously when this explanation was given, and watched
them for some time with obvious suspicion. But the men seemed not to be plotting together,
and to be thinking only of their work. If the English were fools enough to do more than they
were made to do it was certainly no loss to their masters.

"I should like to know the name of that vinegar-faced captain," said Edrupt one day. "I mistrust
he wasn't born here."

"No," said Nicholas. "They call him the Khawadji, and they never use that name for one of themselves."

"He's too free with his whip. Yon tall man that tends his horses could tell something of that,
I make my guess."

One night they came on the Khawadji's stable-man caring for a lame horse with such skill that
Nicholas spoke of it. By some instinct he spoke in Norman-French. The other answered in the
same tongue.

"Every knight should know his horse."

"You are of gentle birth, my lord?"

"Call me not lord," the Norman said wearily. "I have seen too much to be any man's lord hereafter.
Since my fever I am fit only for this, and none will know the grave of Stephen Giffard."

Nicholas' heart leaped. "Sir," he said quickly, "ere we left London the Lady Adelicia, your
wife, came to my father's house to beseech him to aid her in searching for you. If any of us
ever see home again I will take care that she is told of this."

The knight looked ten years younger. "I thank you," he answered gravely. "And if I should not
live to see her again, I would have her know that my thoughts have been constantly of her."

"Is not this Khawadji a caitiff knight of France? He does not seem like a Moor."

The Norman nodded. "He is Garin de Biterres, a miscreant of Guienne. My brother balked him
in some villainy years ago. He took me for Walter when he saw me, and let it out. Aquitaine
being too hot to hold him, and the Normans in Ireland refusing to enlist him, he came through
the Breach of Roland and took service under the Crescent. He was once a slave among the Moors
of Andalusia, and owes his deformity to that. He cozened an old beggar into treating his leg
with some ointment which would wither it up so that he could not work, and it never wholly
recovered."

"How comes it that he has not allowed you to send word to your people? Most of these folk are
greedy for ransom."

"I think he keeps me here for his pleasure. At first he took the letters I wrote and pretended
to have sent them, and gibed in his bitter fashion when no reply came. That is how I know that
the letters were not sent at all. Had my lady heard so much as a word of my captivity she would
have searched me out."

The approach of some troopers broke off the conversation, and Nicholas went his way, marveling
at the strange chances of life.

Some months passed, during which the English worked at varying tasks-- brickmaking, the hauling
of brick and cut stone, the building of walls. Then a merchant called Mustafa came seeking
slaves for his galley. After much crafty bargaining he secured Nicholas and his companions
for about two-thirds the original price asked. But the Khawadji refused to part with Stephen
Giffard.

The galley was a rackety, noisome trading-ship that plied along the coast. On board were already
some rowers of various races, accustomed to the work, but the bulk of the labor was to be done
by the new men. It was killing toil. Fed on black beans and coarse bread and unclean water,
they worked the ship from one filthy white-walled port to another, never seeing more than the
dock where the galley anchored or some mean street where their barracks might be. There were
times when Nicholas seemed to himself hardly more human than the rats that gnawed and scrabbled
in the dark at night. He began to see how a galley-slave is made--molded and tainted through
and through by that of which he is a part.

The clean comradeship of the little group of Northern exiles did not count for so much in this
work. The pace of the ship was the average pace of the whole crew. They became too weary to
think or feel, too ravenous to disdain the most unwholesome rations. Nicholas found himself
mysteriously aware of the moods of those about him, as men are when herded together in silent
multitudes. In the free world one feels this only now and then--in an army, a mob, a church.
Among slaves the dog-like instinct is common. They know more of their masters than their masters
can ever know of them.

Nicholas had been carefully trained by wise parents to the habit of self- control, but he found
that he was moved nevertheless by the mad unreasoning impulses of the half-barbarous people
about him, ridden fiercely by their black thoughts of hate and fear. That it was the same with
his comrades he knew from little things they said--and even more from what they did not say.
They grew dulled to beauty and suffering alike. There were glorious dawns, that flushed the
white walls of a seaport rose- red, above waters of mingled ink and blood that changed as by
magic to blue like lapis-lazuli. Then the sky turned saffron and the minarets were of a fleeting
gold above the deep blue shadows of the streets. There were velvet nights when the stars blazed
like a king's ransom, and white-robed desert men moved in the moist chill air like phantoms.
But all this was as little to them as to the lizards that crept along the walls or the sweeps
they handled with their hardening hands. Years after, Nicholas recalled those nights and those
mornings and knew that something that sat within his deadened brain had been alive and had
stored the memories for him. But he did not know it then.

Mustafa bragged among his friends, from Jebel el Tarik to Iskanderia, of his fine ship and
his unparalleled crew. The listeners would smile and stroke their beards and exclaim at intervals,
"Ma sh'Allah!"--believing perhaps one tenth of what they heard. Oftenest he boasted of the
Feringhi rowers whom he had purchased from the sheikh's own steward in the slave- market of
Lundra--a city of mist and wealth and pigs and fair maidens. Thus it came about that Ahmed
ibn Said, the host, and Abu Selim, the letter-writer of the bazaar, devised a jest for a supper
at the khan. They would send for one of these Frankish slaves and see what he would say. The
flattered Mustafa agreed, and the messenger returned with Nicholas Gay, whose gray eyes and
yellow hair caused a mild sensation.

The guests began to ask questions, first in Levantine, then in Arabic. Were there bazaars in
Lundra? Did the people drink coffee? Had they camels? Did the muezzin call them to prayer?
Did the women sleep upon the housetops? Was the city most like Aleppo the White, or Istamboul,
or Damasc-ush-Shah? How many Muslimun were there? How many of the idolaters?

To these inquiries Nicholas replied, at first with faint amusement at the mingled shrewdness
and ignorance of these men, then with a fierce pride in his city which made his words, as the
letter-writer expressed it, shine like rubies and sing like a fountain. The merchants listened,
and munched their sticky baclawi, ripe olives and dates and figs, and drank many tiny cups
of coffee, more entertained than they had ever been by Mustafa. Finally the host sent for a
basket of fruit--great pale Egyptian melons, pomegranates, oranges, figs--and graciously bestowed
it upon the gifted galley-slave. He meant to come next day, he said, and with Mustafa's permission
behold the prowess of the English in swimming.

To every one's surprise, Ahmed really came. Those who could swim were had out of their stifling
quarters and allowed to do so. Nicholas could swim like an eel, and all were amazed when, after
swimming farther out than any of the others, he flung up his arms, uttered a loud cry, and
vanished. They watched and searched, but nothing more was seen of him, and there was mourning
among the English.

But there was a Genoese galley in the harbor, and Nicholas had seen it. He had dived, swum
under water as far as he could inshore, and come up with his head inside the scooped-out rind
of a large melon. During the search the seeming melon quietly bobbed away toward a reedy shallow,
and the swimmer hid among the reeds until dark, and then swam across to the Genoese ship. The
captain knew Gilbert Gay and listened with interest to the youth's story.

The Genoese captain did not care to interfere with' Mustafa in a town full of his Moslem countrymen.
He waited until the crazy trading-galley was well out to sea and rammed her with the beak of
his own ship. Crossbowmen lined the rail, grappling irons were thrown out, and the captain,
with Nicholas and some soldiers, went and unearthed Mustafa among bales of striped cotton.
When he understood that they merely wanted all of his Feringhi slaves, he thankfully surrendered
them.

"Shall we put this fellow to death?" inquired the captain. Mustafa understood the tone and
gesture though not the words, and turned a dirty yellow-gray. "No," said Nicholas Gay. "He
was a good master--for an Arab."

Mustafa took heart. He would never reach port, he complained, being so short-handed.

"You can work your ship under sail for that distance," said the Genoese, twisting his mustachios,
"if you dare loose your other slaves." At that Mustafa had an ague. When they saw the last
of him he was making slow and crooked progress.

"And after all," said Edrupt one day, as they sighted the cliffs of Dover, "you bore witness
among the heathen, as the fat old monk directed."

"Stupid pig!" David grumbled. "I'd like fine to have him bearing witness in a Barbary brick-yard,
sweating and whaizling over his tale o' brick. He'd throw his six hundred a day or I'd have
his hide."

"All the same," said Edrupt thoughtfully, "a Londoner beats a Turk even for a galley-slave--eh,
Nicholas?"

"We were never slaves," said Nicholas. "We were free men doing the work of slaves for a time.
We had memory and hope left us. There is nothing to be learned at such work. Stick together
and give them the slip if you can-- that's all the wisdom of the galleys."

HARBOUR SONG

 Sails in the mist-gray morning, wide wings alert for flight,
 Outward you fare with the sea-wind, seeking your ancient right
 To range with your foster-brethren, the sleepless waves of the sea,
 And come at the end of your wandering home again to me.
     By the bright Antares, the Shield of Sobieski,
         By the Southern Cross ablaze above the hot black sea,
     You shall seek the Pole-Star below the far horizon,--
         Steer by Arthur's Wain, lads, and home again to me!

 Caravel, sloop and galleon follow the salt sea gale
 That whispers ever of treasure, the ancient maddening tale,--
 Round the world he leads ye, the sorcerer of the sea,
 Battered and patched and bleeding ye come again to me.
     By the spice and sendal, beads and trumpery trinkets,
         By the weight of ingots that cost a thousand dead,
     You shall seek your fortune under hawthorn hedges,--
         Come to know your birthright in the land you fled.

 Sails of my sons and my lovers, I watch for ye through the night,
 My lamps are trimmed and burning, my hearth is clear and bright.
 With every sough of the trade-wind that blows across the sea
 I wake and wait and listen for the call of your hearts to me.
     By Saint Malo's lanterns, by Medusa-fires
         Rolling round your plunging prows in midnight tropic sea,
     You shall sight the beacon on my headlands lifting--
         All sail set, lads, and home again to me!

XIV

SOLOMON'S SEAL

Where the moor met the woodland beyond the Fairies' Hill, old Izan went painfully searching
for the herbs she had been wont to find there. The woodcutters had opened clearings that gave
an unaccustomed look to the place. Fumiter, mercury, gilt-cups, four-leaved grass and the delicate
blossoms of herb-robert came out to meet the sun with a half-scared look, and wished they had
stayed underground. The old wife was in a bad humor, and she was not the better pleased when
her donkey, moved by some eccentric donkeyish idea, gave a loud bray and went trotting gleefully
off down the hill.

"Saints save us!" muttered the old woman, shaking a vain crutch after him. "I can never walk
all that distance."

But the donkey was not to get his holiday so easily. There came a shout from the forest, and
a boy on a brown moor pony went racing off after the truant beast, while a lady and a young
girl looked on laughing. It was a very pretty chase, but at last Roger came back in triumph
and tethered the donkey, repentant and lop-eared, to a wind-warped oak.

"O Mother Izan!" cried Eleanor, "we've found a great parcel of herbs. I never saw this before,
but mother thinks it's what they called polygonec in France and used for bruises and wounds."

The old woman seized eagerly on the plant. It was a long curved stalk with a knotted root and
oval leaves almost concealing the narrow greenish bells that hung from the joints of the stem.
"Aye," she said, "that's Solomon's Seal, and 'tis master good for ointment. The women," she
added dryly, "mostly comes for it after their men ha' made holiday."

Eleanor was already off her pony, and Roger followed her. "We'll get you all you want, Mother
Izan," she called back; "there's ever so much of it up here among the rocks."

"I should like to know," queried Roger as they pulled and pried at the queer twisted roots,
"why they call this Solomon's Seal. I don't believe Solomon ever came here."

"Maybe it was because he was so wise," said Eleanor sagely. "Mother said it was good to seal
wounds. We'll ask David."

In those days a knowledge of herbs and medicines was part of a lady's education. Physicians
were few, and in remote places the ladies of the castle were called upon not only to nurse
but to prescribe for cases of accident, fever, wounds or pestilence. Rarely did a week go by
without Lady Philippa being consulted about some illness among her husband's people. She had
begun to teach Eleanor the use of herbs, especially the nature of those to be found in the
neighborhood, and here Mother Izan was of great service. In her younger days she had ranged
the country for miles in every direction, in search of healing plants, and she knew what grew
in every swamp, glen, meadow and thicket.

"Mother Izan must have been uncommonly anxious to get that Solomon's Seal," said Roger as they
rode home in the purple dusk. "I believe Howel has been beating Gwillym again."

Almost as well-informed as Mother Izan was David Saumond, the stone-mason, who was rebuilding
the village church. He had come to the castle one day with news of Sir Stephen Giffard, Eleanor's
uncle, who had been a prisoner among the infidels but had now been ransomed and was on his
way home. Finding that David understood his business, the lord and lady of the castle had decided
to give into his hands the work to be done on the church. Masons were scarce in England at
that time, and most of those who had skill were at work on half-built cathedrals. David was
a wise and thorough builder, but he had the reputation of being rather crotchety. Sir Walter
Giffard suspected that this was due to his absolute honesty. He would rather pick up a job
here and there which he could do as it should be done, than to have steady employment where
scamped building was winked at. This suited the knight very well. He wanted a man whom he need
not watch.

"An unfaithful mason's like a broken tooth or a foot out of joint," observed the Scot when
he saw some haphazard masonry he was to replace with proper stonework. "That wall's a bit o'
baith."

David would take all the pains in the world with a well-meaning but slow workman, but he disposed
of shirkers and double-dealers without needless words. Neither did he encourage discussion
and idle talk about the work.

"A true mason's no sae glib-gabbet," he observed one day. "There's no need o' speechmaking
to make an adder bite or a gude man work."

David confirmed Mother Izan's opinion of the virtues of Solomon's Seal. The Turks, he said,
used to eat the young shoots, cooked. The children already knew that Solomon was the Grand
Worshipful Master of all the masons of the world. About his majestic and mystical figure centered
legends and traditions innumerable. Solomon's Knot was a curious intricate combination of curving
lines. Solomon's signet was a stone of magical virtues. The temple of Solomon was the most
wonderful building ever seen, and the secrets of its masonry were still treasured by master
masons everywhere. No sound of building was heard within its walls; the stones were so perfectly
cut and fitted that they slid into their places without noise. And Solomon himself was the
wisest man who ever lived. He could understand the talk of the martins under the eaves, the
mice in the meal- tub and the beasts of burden in the stables, when they conversed among themselves.

"Aiblins that's what gar'd him grow sae unco wise," David ended. "You bear in mind, Master
Roger, that every leevin' thing ye see, frae baukie-bird tae blackfish, kens some bit cantrip
he doesna tell, and ye'll be a Solomon--if ye live."

David was eating his bread and cheese on the lee side of the wall when Eleanor came by with
a gray lump of clay in her hands.

"See what Gwillym has made," she said.

David stopped with the cheese half way to his mouth. "Who's Gwillym?" he asked.

"He's a boy we've known ever since he was very little--he's only eight now--and he does make
the most alive looking things out of clay. He heard you telling about Solomon talking with
the birds and beasts, and he made this."

The clay group was really an unusual piece of modelling for an untrained hand. That a child
should have made it was more than remarkable. The thin bent figure of the wise King was seated
on a throne formed of gnarled tree-roots. On his wrist a raven perched; on his shoulder crouched
a squirrel, with tail alert for flight; two rabbits sat upright at his feet; a lamb huddled
against his knee on one side and a goat on the other. The figures all had a curiously lifelike
appearance. As Eleanor said, one felt that if they heard a noise they would go away. Moreover
she saw with wonder that the head of King Solomon and his lifted hand made him a fair portrait
of David.

David took the clay group in his hand, turned it about, whistled softly. "Wha owns this bairn?"
he inquired.

"Howel's his father," said Roger. "He's quite good to him--unless he's drunk. Then he pounds
him. He hates to have Gwillym make images; he thinks it's witch-craft. Gwillym made an image
of him once and the leg broke off, and that very same day Howel's donkey kicked him and made
him lame for a week."

"There's ower mony gowks in the land for a' the mills to grind," said David, and that was all
they could get out of him. They knew he was interested or he would not have been so Scotch.
David could speak very good English, and did as a rule, but with Eleanor and Roger he often
returned to the speech of his boyhood because they liked it so much.

They liked David exceedingly. He had seen more interesting things than any one else they knew.
He showed Roger how to make a fish-pond, and he told Eleanor how the Saracen city in her tapestry
ought to look. He had himself been a slave among the infidels, and the children heard his adventures
with awe and delight. Eleanor loved the story of the bath-pavilion like a tiny palace, built
by the emir for the lady Halima, and the turning of the course of a river to fill her baths
and her fountains, and water her gardens. Roger's hero was the young English merchant who had
escaped by swimming, under his master's very nose. If one could have such exciting experiences
it seemed almost worth while to be a captive of the Moslems. But when Roger said so, David
smiled a dry smile and said nothing.

But it was of King Solomon that he spoke most, and he seemed to have the sayings of the wise
king all by heart. A Hebrew physician whom he had once known used, he said, to write one of
Solomon's proverbs on the lid of every box of salve he sent out.

"You follow his wisdom, Master Roger," David said one day, "and you'll see how to build ye
a house or a kingdom. 'Envy thou not the oppressor and choose none of his ways,' he says. 'Withhold
not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of man to do it,' he says.

Thus the stonemason was touched more deeply perhaps than he would have owned, by the likening
of his face to that of Solomon in the clay figures of little Gwillym ap Howel.

As the work on the church progressed three friends of David's journeyed from Salisbury to see
him. They had come from Lombardy a long time ago, when they were Piero, Andrea and Gianbattista.
At Avignon they were known as Pierre, Jean-Baptiste and Andre, and in Spain they were rechristened
Pedro, Juan and Andres. Now they were called Peter, Andrew and John,--and sometimes the Apostles.
Peter understood vaulting; Andrew could carve a stone image of anything he saw, and John had
great skill in the laying of pavements. They talked of cathedrals and palaces with a familiarity
that took one's breath away.

The building of a cathedral seemed to be full of a kind of fairy lore. The plan was that of
a crucifix, the chancel being the head, the transept the arms and the nave representing body
and legs. The two western towers stood for Adam and Eve. There was a magic in numbers; three,
seven and nine were better than six, eleven or thirteen. Certain flowers were marked for use
in sacred sculpture as they were for other purposes. Euphrasy or eyebright with its little
bright eye was a medicine for sore eyes. The four-petaled flowers,--the cross-bearers,--were
never poisonous, and many of them, as mustard and cabbage, were valuable for food or medicine.
But when Roger took this lore to Mother Izan for her opinion she remarked that if that was
doctors' learning it was no wonder they killed more folk than they cured.

In fact the three Lombard builders, while each man was a master of his own especial art, had
done most of their work in cities, and when it came to matters of the fields and woods they
were not to be trusted. But when David found Roger a little inclined to vaunt his superior
woodcraft he set him a riddle to answer:

     "The baldmouse and the chauve-souri,
        The baukie-bird and bat,
      The barbastel and flittermouse,--
        How many birds be that?"

And the masons were all grinning at him before Roger found out that these were half a dozen
names for the bat, from as many different places.

The vaulting of the roof of the church was now under consideration. For so small a building
the "barrel vault," a row of round arches, was often used; but David's voice was for the pointed
arch throughout. "The soarin' curve lifts the eye," he said, "like the mountains yonder." He
drew with a bit of charcoal a line so beautiful that it was like music. It was not merely the
meeting of two arcs of a circle, but the meeting of two mysteriously curved perfect lines.
Sir Walter Giffard saw at a glance that here was the arch he had dreamed of.

He saw more than that. David was that rare builder, a man who can work with his hands and see
all the time inside his soul the completed work. He could no more endure slipshod work or graceless
lines in his building than the knight himself could do a cowardly or dishonest thing. David
would have done his task faithfully in any case, but it rejoiced his soul to find that the
knight and his lady would know not only that their village church was beautiful, but why it was so.

Andrew was at work upon the decorative carving of the arches of the doorway. The outer was
done in broad severe lines heavily undercut; the next inner arch in a simple pattern of alternating
bosses and short lines- -Andrew called it the egg and dart pattern--and the inner arch in a
delicate vine rather like the ivy that grew over the keep. Andrew said it was a vine found
in the ruins of the Coliseum at Rome.

When it came to the carving of the animals and birds and figures for the inside of the church,
Andrew's designs did not quite suit Lady Philippa. They were either too classical or too grotesque;
they were better fitted to the elaborate richness of a great cathedral than to a little stone
church in the mountains. She would have liked figures which would seem familiar to the people,
of the birds and beasts they knew, but Andrew did not know anything about this countryside.

"Mother," said Eleanor one night after this had been talked over, "what if Roger and I were
to ask Andrew to go with us to Mother Izan's and see her tame birds and animals, and Gwillym's
squirrel? And we could explain what he wants of them."

Like many children in such remote places, Eleanor and Roger had picked up dialects as they
did rhymes or games, and often interpreted for a peasant who knew neither Norman nor Saxon
and wished to make himself understood at the castle.

The idea met with approval, and the next day Lady Philippa, Eleanor, Roger and Andrew went
to the cottage by the Fairies' Well. They found that David had been there before them.

"He's a knowledgeable man, that," the old woman said with a shrewd smile. "He's even talked
Howel into letting the clay images alone, he has. Gwillym's down by the claybank now, a-making
Saint Blaise and little Merlin."

The cottage evidently was a new sort of place to Andrew, and his dark eyes were full of kindly
interest as he looked about. The old dame sat humped in her doorway among her chirping, fluttering,
barking and squeaking pets. An ancient raven cocked his eye wisely at the visitors, a tame
hare hopped about the floor, a cat with three kittens, all as black as soot, occupied a basket,
and there were also a fox cub rescued from a trap, a cosset lamb and a tiny hedgehog. Birds
nested in the thatch; a squirrel barked from the lintel, and all the four-footed things of
the neighborhood seemed at home there,

The stone-carver readily made friends with Gwillym, who seemed to understand by some instinct
his broken talk and lively gestures. When Andrew wished to know what some bird or animal was
like, the boy would mold it in clay, or perhaps take him to some haunt of the woodlands where
they could lie motionless for a half-hour watching the live creature itself.

But there was one among Gwillym's clay figures which they never saw in the forest, and to which
the boy never would give a name. It was a shaggy half-human imp with stubby horns, goat-legs
and little hoofed feet. He modeled it, bent under a huge bundle, perched on a point of rock,
dancing, playing on an oaten pipe. Andrew was so taken with the seated figure that he copied
it in stone to hold up the font.

"What's that for?" asked David when he saw it. "Are ye askin' Auld Hornie ben the kirk, man?"

Andrew laughed and dusted his pointed brown fingers. "One of Pan's people, David. They will
not stay away from us. If you sprinkle the threshold with holy water they come through the window."

That figure puzzled David, but Gwillym would say nothing. At last the church was finished,
and the village girls went gathering fresh rushes, fragrant herbs and flowers to strew the
floor. David went fishing with Roger in Roger's own particular trout-stream. Coming back in
the twilight they beheld Gwillym dancing upon the moss, to the piping of a strange little hairy
man sitting on a rock. An instant later the stranger vanished, and the boy came toward them
searching their faces with his solemn black eyes.

"That was my playfellow," he said. "I have not seen him for a long time. He and his people
lived here once, but they ran away when there came to be so many houses. I used to hide in
the woods when father came seeking me at Mother Izan's, and my playfellow gave me nuts and
berries and wild honey. He said that if father beat me I was to go and live with his people.
I think I should if you had not come."

Howel, the mason, was a bewildered man that night. He agreed, before he fairly knew what he
was about, to David's adopting Gwillym as his own son, to go with him to the house of a good
woman in London and be taught all that a lad should learn. In time he might be able to carve
stone saints and angels, kings and queens, gargoyles and griffins, for great cathedrals. And
all this had come of the forbidden clay toys.

"I beat him week after week," he muttered, "for melling wi' mud images and running away to
the forest to play wi' devils. 'Twas no good to him, being reared by an old witch."

David's mouth set in a grim line and he rubbed the little black head with his crooked, skillful,
weatherworn hand.

"Even a child is known by his doings, whether his heart be pure, and whether it be right,"
he said half aloud as he led Gwillym away toward his own lodgings. "But the fool hates knowledge.
The hearing ear and the seeing eye are the gifts of the Lord--and if a man was meant to be
a bat or a donkey he'd ha' been made so. When Solomon said that a wise son maketh a glad father
he didna reckon on a father being a fule. Ye'll say yer farewells to Auld Hornie, laddie, and
then we'll gang awa' to London and leave Solomon's Seal i' the wilderness."

And that was how the little wild cave-man of the forest came to be inside a village church,
under the font for the christening.

THE LEPRECHAUN

Terence he was a harper tall, and served the King o' Kildare, And lords and lodies free-handed
all gave largesse to him there, And once when he followed the crescent moon to the rose of
a summer dawn, Wandering down the mountain-side, he met the Leprechaun.

And a wondrous power of heart and voice came over Terence then, For a secret in his harp-strings
lay, to call to the hearts of men, That he could make magic of common songs, and none might
understand The words he said nor the dreams they bred--for he had them of Fairyland.

Eily she was a colleen fair, the light of the harper's eyes, And he won by the aid of the Leprechaun
his long-desired prize. The wedding-feast was but just begun,--when 'twixt the dark and the
day, Quick as the water that runs to earth the Leprechaun slipped away!

So the daylight came, and the dreams were past, and the wild harp
    sang no more,
And Terence looked at the cold black hearth and the silent open door,
And he cried, "I have sold my life this night, ye have my heart in
    pawn,--
Take wife and gold, but come ye back, ye little Leprechaun!"

XV

BLACK MAGIC IN THE TEMPLE

No one could say just how it came to be whispered that the Templars of Temple Assheton dealt
in black magic. Travelers told strange tales of France, where the Order was stronger than it
was in England--tales of unhallowed processionals and midnight incantations learned from the
infidels of Syria. A Preceptor, Gregory of Hildesheim, was said to possess writings of a wizard
who had suffered death some years before, and to have used them for the profit of the Order.

Swart the drover, who had sold many good horses to the Templars and expected to sell more,
laughed at these uncanny rumors. Wealthy the Order was, to be sure, but that was no miracle.
Its vaults, being protected not only by the consecration of the building but by its trained
body of military monks, often held the treasure of princes. Moreover, this powerful military
Order attracted many men of high birth. Their estates became part of the common fund, since
no individual Templar could own anything.

Unfortunately, Swart's facts were so much less romantic than the tales of enchantment that
they made very little impression. The grasping arrogance of the Templars caused them to be
hated and feared, and if they were really wizards it was just as well not to investigate them
too closely. And if they had in truth learned the art of making gold, it was only another proof
of that old and well-tried rule, "He who has, gets."

Gregory had not, however, discovered that secret as yet. He had had great hopes of certain
formulae bought at a large price of a clerk named Simon, who stole them from the reputed wizard;
but when he tried them, there was always some little thing which would not work. At last he
bethought him of one Tomaso of Padua, who had been a friend of the dead man and might possibly
have some some valuable knowledge. The physician was at the time in a market-town about twelve
miles off, resting for a few days before proceeding to London. He was an old man and journeys
were fatiguing to him. Gregory sent a company of men-at-arms to invite him to come to Temple
Assheton. The request was made on a lonely path in a forest, along which Tomaso was riding
to visit a sick child on a remote farm. It would have been impossible for him to refuse it.

Rain was dripping from the drenched bare boughs of half-fledged trees, clouds hung purple-gray
over the bleak moors; the river had overflowed the meadows, and the horses floundered flank-deep
over the paved ford. Few travelers were abroad. Those who saw the black and white livery of
the Temple, and the old man in the long dark cloak who rode beside the leader, looked at one
another, and wondered.

When the cavalcade rode in at the great gate, where the round Temple crouched half-hidden among
its grim and stately halls, the physician was taken at once to Gregory's private chamber. The
Preceptor greeted him urbanely. "Master Tomaso," he said, "men say that you have learned to
make gold."

"They say many things impossible to prove, as you are doubtless aware," Tomaso answered.

"Do you then deny that it is possible?" persisted Gregory.

"He is foolish," Tomaso returned, "who denies that a thing may happen, because he finds it
extraordinary."

"Under certain conditions, you would say, it can be done?"

"When the donkey climbs the ladder he may find carrots on the tiles," was the Paduan's reply.
The weasel-like face of the Templar contorted in a wry grin.

"You bandy words like an Aristotelian, sir alchemist," he said sharply, "therefore we will
be plain with you. You shall be lodged here with suitable means for your experiments until
such time as your pretensions are justified--if they are. Should you prove yourself a wizard,
a dabbler in the black art and a deceiver of the people, you shall be so punished that all
men may know we share not in your guilt. Reflection hereupon may perchance quicken your understanding.
Until you have news of importance for our hearing, farewell."

With what he could summon of dignity, the Preceptor turned from the calm gaze of the physician
and left the guards to conduct him to his lodging. There was really nothing else to do. It
was a risk, of course. Tomaso was well known. He had the confidence of the King himself. But
the situation was difficult. Prince John, who was usually in straits despite his father's generosity,
had hinted to Gregory lately that he meant to inquire in person about the reported making of
gold in the Temple. Could he have guessed somehow that two chests of ingots from a Cadiz galley
had come to Temple Assheton instead of to the King's treasury? Or did he believe the story
of the making of gold?

Gregory was but too certain that if John found any treasure of doubtful title he would seize
it, and he was acutely unhappy. However, if Tomaso possessed the secret--or some other secret
of value--there was yet a chance to save the Cadiz ingots. If this plan failed the scapegoat
would not be a Templar.

Tomaso knew what was passing in his enemy's mind, not through any supernatural means, but by
his knowledge of human nature. He was aware, as he lay on his narrow straw bed, that his life
was in imminent danger. No one knew where he was; no message could reach his friends. A discredited
wizard could count on no popular sympathy. The record of his studies for many years would vanish
like the wind-blown candle-flame. Yet after some hours of wakefulness he slept, as tranquilly
as a child.

A red-headed youth in the dress of a clerk, who was to have met Tomaso on the morrow, waited
for him in vain. On the second day he started in search of his old friend, and weary and mud-bespattered,
came at last to Temple Assheton. On the road he fell in with Swart the drover, who told him
of the reported alchemy. "Gold would be common as fodder if any man could make it," Swart growled,
"and when a man's wise beyond others in the art of healing, 'tis wicked folly to burn him alive
for't."

Padraig's face lost every trace of color. "W-who says that?"

"The crows and herons, I suppose," said the drover coolly. "Anyhow none of the folk in the
village know where the story started, and nobody but a bird on the wing could see over those
walls. 'Tis said that ten days hence, if the old doctor don't make gold for them, they'll burn
him for a wizard. Now that's no sense, for if he could make gold he'd be a wizard no bounds,
and they'd not burn him then, I reckon."

Padraig looked down the valley at the tender gold-green grass and the snowdrift apple-boughs
of spring, It seemed impossible that those grim gray walls held within them this cruel and
implacable spirit. "Can I get a trustworthy messenger?" he asked. "I would send a letter to
the Master's friends."

With the ready understanding of men who see and judge strange faces constantly, Swart and Padraig
had taken each other's measure and been satisfied. "My nephew Hod will go," Swart answered.
Hod was the son of the farmer whose house Tomaso had visited.

Padraig was busy with tablets and inkhorn. He folded and sealed his note, written in the clear
stubbed hand of the monasteries. "I am Padraig," he said, "a scribe of the Irish Benedictines.
If the Master comes to harm there will be a heavy reckoning, but that will come too late. I
will rescue him or die with him--are you with me?"

Swart pulled at his huge beard. "The Swarts of Aschenrugge," he said, "have dwelt too long
in these parts to bow neck to a Templar. Hod shall ride with the letter, and if it be thy choice
to risk thine own life for thy master's I've no call to betray thee."

A dark-browed yokel came to the door with the bridle of Swart's best horse over his arm. "Take
this," Padraig directed, "to Robert Edrupt, the wool merchant at Long Lea near Stratton. If
he be from home give it to his wife Barbara and tell her to open and read it. She is wise and
will do what is right. Here is money--all I have--but you shall be paid well when the errand
is done; I have asked Edrupt to see to that."

Hod stuck his thumbs in his belt. "Put up thy money," he muttered. "The old doctor he cured
our Cicely, he did."

The messenger gone, Padraig went straight to the Temple and asked to see the Preceptor. Gregory
listened at first with suspicion, then with wonder, to what the stranger told. It seemed that,
hearing that a famous alchemist was at work in the Temple, he had come to crave the privilege
of acting as his servant. It was, he said, absolutely necessary that such a master should have
a disciple at hand for the actual work, and be left undisturbed in meditation meanwhile."

"Is this necessary to the making of gold?" asked Gregory.

"Surely," Padraig assured him. "The pupil cannot do the work of the master, the master must
not be compelled to labor as the pupil. It is written in our books--Feliciter is sapit, qui
periculo alieno sapit--Those are fortunate who learn at the risk of another,--and again, He
is wise who profits by others' folly."

Gregory eyed the stranger warily, but in Padraig's blue eyes he saw only childlike innocence
and fanatical zeal. If a madman, he was a useful one. By his help the experiments could be
carried on without imperiling any Templar. He directed a page to show Padraig the way to Tomaso's
chamber.

"My son!" said the physician as he lifted his eyes from his writing and saw who was in the
doorway, "how came you here?"

"I came to be with you, Master," Padraig answered with a glance behind him to make sure the
page was gone, "to rescue you if I can. What else could I have done?"

Then he related his conversation with Gregory. "Through a drover of this place who is our friend,"
he ended, "I have sent word to Robert Edrupt asking him to get word of this to the King or
to the Bishop. But if help does not come in time--"

"Che sara sara (What will be, will be)," said Tomaso coolly. "I have made a fair copy of these
writings in the hope that I might send them to Brother Basil."

Padraig knelt at the physician's feet, his beseeching eyes raised to the kindly, serene old
face. "Master Tomaso," he stammered, "they shall not do this thing--I cannot b-bear it! We
have--we have the formula for the Apples of Sodom, and--and other things. They would give more
than gold for that knowledge."

Tomaso laid a gentle hand upon the young shoulder. "My dear son," he said, "when we learned
the secrets of Archiater--those secrets which mean death- -we promised one another, all of
us, never to use them save to the glory of God and the honor of our land. Which of these, think
you, would be served by lending them to the evil plots of a traitor?"

Padraig caught the hand of his master in both his own. "It is beyond endurance!" he cried piteously.

"I have knowledge," Tomaso went on, "that this Gregory is partly pledged to the faction of
Prince John. The Templars have no country, but they think, with some reason, that they can
bend John to their purposes. What would they do, with the power these fires of Tophet would
give them? Padraig, there is no safety in the breaking of a pledge."

A thought came into the boy's mind, and a wild hope with it. "Master Tomaso," he cried, "if
I can find a way to use our knowledge without breaking the pledge, will you give me my way?"

The Paduan looked long into the uplifted eager face. "It is good to be so loved," he said.
"I will trust you. Yet grieve not, whatever comes,--the stars are my fortress, God is my lamp.
The bridge to eternal life is very short."

Padraig's cell was the one just below, and the window looked out across the moors. Chin on
his crossed arms, he pondered long under the stars. The next day he informed the Preceptor
that the alchemist was ready to begin the making of Spanish gold, and must on no account be
disturbed.

He showed Gregory the formula. It was not very easy to understand, but it was impressive. Cockatrice
eggs were to be placed carefully in a nest in a stone walled underground chamber, which must
be sealed from the outer air when all was ready. Snakes and toads brooding thereon would in
time hatch out baby monsters--creatures with cocks' heads and the tails and wings of dragons.
Their look was sure death, but they could be poisoned by a draught compounded of agrimony,
dill and vervain. This must be prepared beforehand and left in a bason where the cockatrice
when hatched would find and drink of it. When all were dead they were to be brayed in a mortar
with other necessary ingredients. Lond. 163--.

Compendious Emblematist; or Writing and Drawing made easy. With many Plates. 4to. Lond.

Emblems Divine, Moral, Natural, and Historical, Expressed in Sculpture, and applied to the several
Ages, Occasions, and Conditions of the Life of Man. By a Person of Quality. With Woodcut Engravings
and Metrical Illustrations. 8vo. Lond. 1673. Printed by J. C. for
Will. Miller.

Emblems for the Entertainment and Improvement of Youth,
with Explanations, on 62 Copper Plates. White Knights. Nay, not only should the Holy Temple be recovered, but it should be
built anew, overlaid with gold as in Solomon's day. He called a steward and ordered him to
fit up a cellar, formerly a passage into the vaults of the oldest part of the building, with
all needful utensils. Braziers, crucibles, retorts and all the usual materials in the way of
metals and powders were there, but of course, no cockatrice eggs.

"He brought these from Andalusia," said Padraig, showing seven small eggs mottled with crimson
and black in a medicine box. Gregory touched one very gingerly. They were in fact waxen shells
filled with volatile liquids, and Padraig had spent most of the night preparing them. He explained
that they were no larger than frogs' eggs when he first had them,--which was perfectly true,
the wax having been carried in the form of balls.

Sulphurous odors came from the cellar where the eggs were supposed to be hatching in their
nest. An unwary hound sniffing about the door got a throatful of the stinging smoke and fled
yowling. Hydrochloric acid, vitriol and nitre-glycerine are kittle things to meddle with, and
the place was religiously avoided.

From the too free tongue of a cellarer one night Padraig learned that this chamber adjoined
the treasure-vaults of the Temple, but the communicating door had been walled up. When the
gold should be ready it could be conveyed into the treasury direct, by reopening this doorway.

One evening Prince John rode up to the gate with a company of Norman men- at-arms and a few
courtiers. It was understood that he had come to investigate the reputed sorceries. On the
same day three strangers came into the village and tarried at Swart's house on Aschenrugge.
He often lodged travelers for a night, being near the highway. Padraig, spying a white signal
on the giant ash which gave the ridge its name, told the impatient Preceptor that the hour
was at hand.

Among the villagers it was said that the physician and his disciple were guarded closely night
and day, and that the Paduan certainly would be burned at the stake if he did not succeed in
making gold. Country folk had seen the stake set up and the faggots piled. In case the wizard
proved a false prophet Gregory meant to make the execution as public as possible.

Padraig explained that the final trial must take place inter canis et lupus--between dog and
wolf--in that hour which is neither daylight nor dark. As dusk fell the knights and esquires
of the Temple ranged themselves in orderly ranks along the walls, at some distance from the
door of the underground chamber. The low archway was now open; the glow of a brazier showed
red against the rear wall. Torches lighted the stone- paved yard, and beyond the open gate
the white faces of peasants crowded, awe-stricken and expectant. When the physician was brought
out by the guards to a seat near the stake, the sobs of a woman were heard in the outer darkness.
Padraig, following, cast a swift glance through the gate and saw the dim shapes of horsemen
outlined against the sky.

Last of all appeared the Preceptor and Prince John with their immediate followers, and took
their seats midway in the ranks of onlookers, directly opposite the door, where they could
see every stage of the proceedings. Gregory, furtively scanning the face of the physician,
saw therein not a sign of fear. Padraig advanced into the open space before the cellar, and
bowed to Prince John and the Preceptor. Then from a niche within the door of the chamber he
lifted a large crucible, and a siffle of indrawn breath was heard in the crowd as he carried
it toward the fire. Gathering pitchy twigs and chaff from a heap of fuel he packed them deftly
into the open top, and set the jar on the brazier, returning then to the side of Tomaso.

The minutes passed but slowly. The nerves of all the spectators were strung to the snapping-point.
Gregory finally began to explain to Prince John, who looked half curious and half skeptical,--

"This crucible, your Grace, is now throwing off the vapors generated by fervent heat. When
these have been absorbed by the chaff above, the gold will be found beneath. The possibilities
of this priceless formula are not as yet altogether known. We do not know what may come to
light. You may be astounded--"

The chaff in the crucible caught fire from a wisp that thrust up into it from the brazier,
flared up of a sudden and lighted every corner of the old cellar. It revealed the craning neck
and slack jaw of Gregory, the covetous glittering eyes and incredulous smile of Prince John,
the scared faces of the huddling peasants. Then there was a crash that shook the earth. Battlements
rocked, pavements cracked, blocks of stone leaped into the air like a fountain of masonry.
When fire encounters high explosives in a tunnel the results are remarkable. Torches dropped
or were blown out, and stumbling, cursing men ran right and left--anywhere to escape the pelting
stones. Padraig, holding to his master's arm, guided him out of the gate and toward the sound
of trampling hoofs upon a little hillock. There they found Edrupt, Guy and Alan struggling
with their frantic horses. Swart came up with two more horses, and soon the party was beyond
all danger of pursuit.

When the stunned and bewildered Templars recovered their breath, they saw nothing of the alchemist
or of his disciple. It was felt to be just and right if they had been carried off bodily by
the foul fiend. No one else was missing, though broken heads and bruises were everywhere. Only
when dawn paled the heavens did the boldest of John's mercenaries venture back to the place
of terror.

There was a great hole in the rear wall of the cellar, and among the ruins lay shining heaps
of gold--not bezants or zecchins, but wedges and bars of a strange reddish hue. They touched
it warily; it was not red-hot. They filled their pouches, and others came and did likewise.
The hard-riding veterans had had no opportunity to plunder for more than a year, and John had
little money for himself and none for them. When Gregory came on the scene, white and shaking
with rage, and somewhat damaged about the face from flying stones, it was too late to hide
his ingots. Pendyfig, 427. Stanford, 1301. Stanford, Kent. Stánlége, 1255. Standlake, Oxon. Ðestinctun,
805. Welingaford, 1154. Wallingford, Berks. Wanhæminga, 1135.

B. WILLIAMS.

* * * * *

INEDITED LETTER.

August 24th, 1690, Qu. Coll. Oxon.

Dear S^r,

I heartily thank you for the favour of your letter, and to shew itt will not fail to write as
often as anything does occurr worth sending, if you think the accountt I give not troublesome. Dr.
Adams, Dr. Rudston, and Delaune have promis'd to write this post: we remembred you both before
and after your letters came w^{th} S^r John Matthews, who staid here
3 nights this weeke.

Our militia is gone home cloath'd in Blew coates but many coxcombs
of this city have refused to pay their quota towards the buying of
them, railing against my L^d Abington, who has smooth'd the mob by
giving a brace of Bucks last Friday in Port Meed.

 J. M. has bin expected here this fortnight:
     the Lady that calls herselfe by his nane
 has bin a good while at Astrop, and has discover'd
     her displeasure there, that her husband as shee calls him keeps the
coach so long from her at Oxford: upon hearing of w^{ch} S^r W. H.
in a blunt way gave her the old name, w^{ch} caus'd some dissatisfaction
and left her smal acquaintance: I heare that the understanding between
our Friend and his uncle is not so good as formerly, but I do not
think it will end in Abdication.

 Mr. Painter is admitted Rector of Exeter.
     The Naked Gospel[3] was burnt on y^e 19th
 in the Scholes Quadrangle. The Regents first
     drew up a Petition to have it censured; then some others more busy
than wise tooke upon them to gett it subscribed, and went to coffee
houses and taverns as well as colleges for that purpose: these proceedings
being ag^{st} statute, and reflecting upon the vice ch., gave great
offence; at last he call'd a meeting of y^e {474} heads of houses,
who deputed 6 to examine it: they pick'd several Proposit. w^{ch}
were read.

 The sentence was in this form: Propositions &^c tanqu[=a]
     falsas et impias in Chris. Relig. et
 in Ecc. præcipue Anglican[=a] contumeliosas
     damnamus, plerasq; insuper hæreticas esse decernimus et declaramus,
&^c. This was first subscribed by all y^e heads of Coll. and then
condemn'd unanimously in a full convocation.

 The Decree is printed, but is too large to
     send. The Author of y^e Booke has sent
 about a soft vindication of himselfe, that he
     is unwilling to be accounted a Socinian, &c. If I can gett a sight
of it I will send you the contents.

 I do not know how far you are in the right about guessing
     at a Bursar: Tim. seems resolv'd to act according to
 y^e song; but I to shew good nature even w^{th}out
     a tree have promis'd to make him a Dial: and when that's done I will
doe y^e like at Astrop.

I am

Your very humble serv^t, W. R.

If you see Coll.

Byerly, give my service to him.

Directed thus: These to George Clark, Esq., Secretary of War in Ireland.

By y^e way of London.

Indorsed: W. Rooke, Rec^d at Tipperary, Sept. 7th.

[Footnote 3: [For some account of this work, by Arthur Bury, and the controversy respecting it,
see Wood's Athenæ, edit. Bliss, vol. i. p. 483

.
 The festivities this year would be greater than ever before,
for a new banquet-hall was to be opened with the Christmas feast. This hall was the realized
dream of years. Thus far the only place for entertainments had been the hall of the keep, which
was also the living-room of the household. The new hall was a separate one-story building,
not unlike a barn in shape, spacious enough for thirty or forty guests with their retainers
and servants. Its red tiled roof, raised upon seasoned beams two or three feet thick, made
an imposing show. The doorway took in almost half of one end and was lofty enough for a standard-bearer
to come in without dipping his banner. There was a fireplace near the middle of one side, with
a hooded stone arch to draw the smoke upward and outward. Opposite was a musicians' gallery
of paneled oak, supported by corbels of stone placed about eight feet above the floor. A dais
was built at the other end of the building from the entrance, for the master's table, and from
this a smaller door opened into a stone passageway leading to the castle, while near it another
door, leading to the kitchens, was placed. The stone walls were wainscoted about halfway up,
and plastered above, the plaster being first painted a golden brown and then decorated with
a pattern of stiff small flowers and leaves in green, red, bright blue and a little gilding.
The floor was of stone blocks laid in a pattern of black and gray, and two steps led from the
dais to the lower part of the hall. At intervals along the upper part of the walls were cressets
of wrought iron in which to set torches, and above the dais were silver sconces for large wax
candles. At intervals also were hooks of ornamental iron-work, from which to hang tapestries
by their metal rings.

Eleanor had spent the greater part of the afternoon helping her mother get out the sets of
tapestries reserved for holiday occasions, among them some which had been kept for this very
hall. Not all were the work of the lady herself. Some were woven and embroidered by her maids
under her direction, others were gifts from friends, and the superb piece which hung above
the dais and represented the marriage of Ulysses and Penelope had been woven in Saumur and
was the gift of the King. The chairs of state with their ebony or ivory footstools were placed,
the candles in the sconces, the rushes and sweet herbs had been strewn upon the floor. Even
the holiday meats and pastries were cooked or made ready for cooking. Until after Twelfth Night
the only work done would be the necessary duties of each day.

There was shouting and laughter in the courtyard. In came most of the boys and young men of
the place, bearing the great Yule log into the hall. Collet the maid, who had just come in
with her mistress, bearing the Yule candle, was sent to get the charred remnant of last year's
log. Both log and candle would burn through the twelve holidays without being quite consumed,
and the bit that was left would be saved to light next year's fires. These familiar homely
ceremonies were not for the stately untouched newness of the banquet-room.

Supper was but just over, and the roasted crab-apples were spluttering in the bowls of brown
ale, when the mummers came, capering in their very best fashion and habited in antic robes
whose pattern--if not the costume itself--had come down from past generations. These actors
were village clowns who had seen such pageants in their boyhood, and they played their rude
drama as they had seen it then, with perhaps a new song or two and a few speeches to tickle
the ears of the new audience. All the household and many of the villagers crowded in after
them to look and laugh and make remarks more or less humorous about the performance. The lord
of the castle and his family disposed themselves to give their countenance to the merrymaking,
and Sir Walter ordered the steward to see that the players had a good supper. He himself would
distribute some money among them when the time came. Then they would go on to give the play
wherever else they could hope for an audience.

The drama was supposed to be founded on the life of Saint George, but no one could say with
truth that it was very much like the legend. First came a herald tooting on a cow-horn, to
proclaim the entrance of the champion, who was Clement the carpenter mounted on a hobby-horse
and armed with wooden sword and painted buckler. There was much giggling and whispering among
the maids, directed at the demure black-eyed Madelon, of the still- room. This may have been
a reason why Saint George stumbled so desperately over his rather long speech. His challenge
was at last finished, and then was heard a discordant clashing of tambourines and horse-bells,
supposed to indicate Saracen music. In cantered a turbaned Turk on another hobby,-- black this
time--and in another long speech very smoothly delivered defied the saint to mortal combat.
There was more tittering, for Tom the blacksmith was also an admirer of that minx Madelon.
The fight was a very lively one, and Saint George had some trouble in holding his own.

When the Saracen lay gasping for breath (very naturally, the victor having placed his foot
upon his breast) the saint somewhat awkwardly expressed sorrow for his deed and sighed for
a doctor. There was a burst of laughter and applause as Ralph the bowyer, the comedian of the
company, came limping in, got up in the character of an old quack who had physicked half the
spectators. He bled and bandaged and salved and dosed the fallen warrior, keeping up a running
fire of remarks the while, until the wounded man arose and went prancing off as good as new.
There was no dragon, but Giles the miller appeared as Beelzebub to avenge the defeat of the
paynim, and was routed in fine style. At the end a company of waits sang carols while the performers
got their breath and repaired damages. The cream of the comedy, to the friends of the wicked
Madelon, lay in the fact that she had the day before given her promise to Ralph, binding him
to say naught to his rivals until the mumming was safely over.

While the players were drinking the health of their lord in his own good brew, the horn sounded
at the gate, and the old porter, who had been watching the mummery, elbowed his way out with
some grumbling to see who could be there. In a few minutes a tall man entered the hall, wearing
the garb of a Palmer or pilgrim from the Holy Land--a long cloak with a cape and a hood that
shadowed the face, a staff, a scrip and sandals. At sight of him a surprised hush fell upon
the company. The common folk drew apart to let him pass, not quite sure but this was a new
figure in the play. But Sir Walter Giffard rose to his feet after one swift glance at the newcomer,
and as the latter threw back his cowl, the host quickly advanced to embrace him, crying, "Stephen!
We feared that you were dead!"

Lady Philippa came forward also, with shining eyes and parted lips, beckoning to the children
to join in the welcome of the stranger. Eleanor scarcely remembered this uncle of hers, whom
she had not seen since leaving Normandy. His eyes were so sad that she felt very sorry for
him, but his smile was so kind that no one could help loving him. He reminded her of Saint
Christopher, who had always been a favorite of hers because he kept away bad dreams.

Stephen Giffard had been ransomed by John de Matha, the Provencal monk who had given himself
to the work of rescuing and befriending prisoners. Hearing from his rescuers that Lady Adelicia,
his wife, had gone with rich gifts to the Holy Land in the hope that her prayers might bring
him home, he took ship to Jaffa and there learned that she had died in Jerusalem. Now he had
settled his affairs and come in the guise of a pilgrim to spend the Christmas season with his
kinfolk in England.

The two brothers sat and talked by the smoldering fire until late that night, speaking of divers
things. It was no wish of Sir Stephen's that his unexpected coming should interrupt or change
the holiday plans. Indeed, many of the guests were his friends as well as his brother's. Eleanor
wondered a little next day, why this recovered kinsman made in one way so little difference
in the life of the household, and yet made so deep an impression. He was not himself merry,
and still he seemed to enter into the joy of others and make it more satisfying. She tried
to express this thought to her mother. The lady smiled, and sighed.

"He is a very good man," she said. "He was always good, and although he has had great troubles
they have not made him hard or bitter--which is not a common thing. We must do all that we
can for him while he is here, for that will not be long. He is going back among the paynim."

"But why, mother?" asked Eleanor, bewildered.

Lady Philippa shook her head. "I think because he is almost--or quite--a saint. Perhaps he
will tell you by-and-by."

It seemed passing strange that Sir Stephen should wish to return to the Moslems after suffering
as he had suffered among them, but there was no time for further discussion then.

Later in the day, when Sir Walter was talking with his steward and Lady Philippa was giving
final directions to maids and cooks and dapifers, Eleanor and Roger found Sir Stephen seated
alone by the flickering, purring Yule-log. Why do you say there is no chance for this normal
property and liberty? You can only mean to say of our scheme exactly what you yourself admit
about the Communist scheme.

That it requires awful and almost inhuman sacrifices; that we must turn the mind upside-down;
that we must alter the whole psychology of modern Englishmen.

We must do that to make them Communists. Why is it an answer to say we must do that to make
them Distributists?

I could point out many ways in which our ideal is nearer and more native to men; but I will not
prolong this debate. I should be very sorry that you should think it is only a debate. I only
ask you to believe that we sympathise where we do not agree; but on this we do not agree.

Mr. Murry wrote later of Gilbert: "I liked the man immensely and he was a very honourable opponent
of mine, much the most honourable I ever encountered."*

[* Mark Twain Quarterly, Chesterton Memorial No.]

G.K.'s Weekly was of course Gilbert's own platform, so perhaps his care to apologise and his
great magnanimity are more remarkable in incidents outside its columns. T. S. Eliot had his platform--he
edited the Criterion. Chesterton on being reproached by him for a hasty article not only apologised
but dedicated a book to Mr. Eliot. He had written confusing him with another critic who disapproved
of alliteration and had also misquoted a stanza of his poetry. Mr. Eliot had written:

I should like you to know that it was apparently your "sympathetic reviewer," not I, who made
the remark about alliteration; to which it seems he added a more general criticism of mine:
so that snob is not the right corrective.

Some of your comments seem to be based on a belief that I object to alliteration.

And may I add, as a humble versifier, that I prefer my verse to be quoted correctly, if at all.

Chesterton replied:

I am so very sorry if my nonsense in the Mercury had any general air of hostility, to say nothing
of any incidental injustices of which I was quite unaware.

I meant it to be quite amiable; like the tremulous badinage of the Oldest Inhabitant in the
bar parlour, when he has been guyed by the brighter lads of the village. I cannot imagine that
I ever said anything about you or any particular person being a snob; for it was quite out
of my thoughts and too serious for the whole affair. I certainly did have the impression,
from the way the reviewer put it, that you disapproved of my alliteration;
I also added that you would be quite right if you did.

I certainly did quote you from memory, and even quote from a quotation; I also mentioned that
I was doing so casual a thing. Of course, on the strictest principles, all quotations should
be verified; and I should certainly have done so if I had in any way resented anything you said,
or been myself writing in a spirit of resentment. If you think a
letter to the Mercury clearing up these points would be fairer to
everybody, of course I should be delighted to write one.

This attitude
of the "oldest inhabitant" was the Chestertonian fashion of accepting
the youthful demand for something new. When a young writer in Colosseum
alluded to him as out of date he took it with the utmost placidity.
"Good," he said to Edward Macdonald. "I like to see people refusing
to accept the opinions of others before they've examined them themselves.
They're perfectly entitled to say that I'm not a literary lion but
a Landseer lion."

"Through the still air we heard the bells calling the monks to prayer. And then the baby woke,
and looked about with wondering innocent eyes, and stretched out its little hands and laughed.
I would you could have seen that grave company then. Every man of them sought a share in that
sweet sudden laughter. The merchant dangled his gold chain, the clerk made clownish gestures,
the merchant put a golden zecchin into the tiny fingers for a toy. And when it slept again
we slept also, or watched the stars and thought of that star which long ago stood over Bethlehem.

"There was a learned doctor in our company who understood Eastern languages and could converse
in Arabic with the wise men from the East. They told him that in their country there is a tradition
that their astrologers, reading the heavens as is their wont, saw Saturn, Jupiter and Mercury
foregather in the House of the Fishes that rules Judea, and knew by this that at such a time
and in such a place a prophet should be born. Therefore came they to visit the child with rich
gifts, and gained from the parents a promise that when he was of an age to learn, he should
be brought to their country to learn of their wisdom, even as Moses was skilled in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians. I know not whether there can be any truth in the legend, but that
is their belief. And yet they are not Christians, but heathen."

Sir Stephen smiled at the two puzzled young faces.

"Nay, more," he went on, "even the followers of Mahound revere Christ as a prophet. Their name
for Him is Ruh' Allah. I have seen a Moslem beat his Christian slave for using an oath that
dishonored the name of Christ. In truth, I have come to think that there are very few unbelievers
in the world. Much wickedness there is--but not unbelief."

"Mother says," Eleanor ventured shyly, "that you are going away to live among the paynim."

"Aye." The knight smiled his fleeting, tender smile. "It is a grief to her, sweet lady, that
I cannot dwell in comfort among you and think no more of voyages. But there is a work laid
upon me, which I must do."

"A Crusade?" The word was just inside Roger's lips, and it slipped out before he thought. Sir
Stephen smiled again.

"Nay. My fighting days are over. But I believe that even a broken man may serve if he be honestly
so minded. I must tell you that for many years I had been troubled, and found no peace, because
even among churchmen there was sloth and selfish greed, and the desire to rule, and the pilgrims
whom I met seemed often moved rather by vanity and love of change than from any true fear of
God. But as you know, I had but begun my homeward journey when our ship was taken by pirates
and the few who were left alive were sold as slaves.

"It is not needful to tell all that befell me as a bondman among the Moors of Barbary. My master
was a renegade knight who had forsworn the Cross and risen to some preferment among the Almohades.
His hate was upon me day and night, and I knew that my lady and my kindred must believe me
dead. And in that black horror of loneliness and despair I found my faith.

"God speaks to us not always in books, nor in words, nor in one place more than another. His
ways are as the wind that blows where it will. It is not what men do to us that kills--it is
what they make of us. They cannot make a soul cruel or foul or treacherous, that hath not lost
God. What is the power of a multitude? Christ died. And His life is the light of men.

"Knighthood is a fair and noble thing, but its vows have no magic--no more than the oaths of
the guilds, or the monastic orders, or the allegiance of the vassal to his lord. It is the
living spirit that keeps the vows--and when that is gone their power is less than nothing.
Once I could not see how it was possible for a man to renounce his knighthood and his Lord.
I have lived with such a man, and I know that it came of his losing faith. He lost the power
to believe in good. I think that he hated me because I reminded him of his own land and all
that he no longer wished to remember.

"Now having known the scourge and the fetters, I may speak to the bondman as a brother. I am
alone, with none to need me. Therefore I go hence to join the brethren who are giving their
lives to this ministry."

The Palmer rose to his feet as if in haste to be gone. "I weary you perchance with talk too
serious for holiday-time," he said with that quick smile of his, "but when you come to your
own work you will know how close to the heart that lies. Now be glad and make others glad--it
was never God's will, I am right sure, that this world should be a doleful place for the young."

The piercing silvery notes of the trumpets in the chill air, the trampling of horses in the
bailey, gave notice of the arrival of guests. There was no more leisure that day.

In the glitter and glow and splendor of the banquet hall, with its music and gayety, the tall
gray figure of the Palmer moved like a spirit. As the guests came one after another to speak
with him of his experiences and his plans, their kindling faces proved his rare power of making
them see what he saw. To Stephen Giffard the presence of God was as real as the sunrise. In
the light of his utter self-sacrifice the loyalty, sweetness and courage of other lives seemed
to shine out more brightly. It was all one with the immortal world of Christendom--ruled by
the living spirit of the child cradled in Bethlehem centuries ago.

THE CRUSADERS

 Daily we waited word or sign--
   They were our children, these
 Who held the unsleeping battle-line
   Beyond the haunted seas,
 Who gave their golden unlived years
   And that clear pathway trod
 Lifting through sunset gates of fire
   To the far tents of God.

 Through trackless realms of unknown space
   They wander, unafraid,
 For nothing do they fear to face
   In worlds that God has made.
 Freed from the shattered bonds of earth
   They meet their comrades free,
 To share the service of the Lord
   In truth and loyalty.

 Elizabeth's wise admirals guard
   Their dear-loved England's coast.
 From Somme and Meuse no cannon barred
   The Maid's undaunted host.
 And still the Foreign Legion hears
   In every desperate chance
 Her children's crashing battle-cry--
   "For France! For France! For France!"

 The captains of the hosts of God
   Know every man by name,
 When from the torn and bleeding sod
   Their spirits pass like flame.
 The maid must wait her lover still,
   The mother wait her son,--
 For very love they may not leave
   The task they have begun.

 If secret plot of greed or fear
   Shall bid the trumpets cease,
 And bind the lands they held so dear
   To base dishonored peace,
 How shall their white battalions rest
   Or sheathe the sword of light,--
 The unbroken armies of our dead,
   Who have not ceased to fight!

NOTES

PEIROL OF THE PIGEONS

The troubadour, minstrel and jongleur or joglar, were not the same in dignity. A troubadour
or trouvere was a poet who sang his own compositions to his own music. A jongleur was a singer
who was not a poet, though he might make songs. He corresponded more nearly to the modern vaudeville
performer. The minstrel was something between the two.

THE TAPESTRY CHAMBER

Saint George was not formally adopted as the patron saint of England until some time after this.

LULLABY OF THE PICT MOTHER

This song may be sung to a very old Scotch air called "O can ye sew cushions."

THE WOLVES OF OSSORY

The werewolf superstition is very persistent, and has been held in many countries until quite
recent times.

ST. HUGH AND THE BIRDS

The reference is to St. Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln, who is represented with his pet swan in most
of his portraits. He founded a Carthusian monastery by the invitation of Henry II., at Witham
in Somerset, and built the choir and a considerable part of Lincoln Cathedral. The stories
of his love for birds are found in old chronicles.

THE SWORD OF DAMASCUS

An armorer's shop very like the one described has been brought from Abbeville and set up in
the Metropolitan Museum of Art in one of the rooms devoted to armor.

THE WISDOM OF THE GALLEYS

"Y'Allah!" (O God!) is a common exclamation, often used as meaning "Make Haste!" Abu Hassan
is "the father of Hassan," In Moslem countries a father often uses his son's name in this way,
allowing his own to be almost forgotten.

Khawaja, Khawadji or Howadji is a title of respect given exclusively to unbelievers.

The Breach of Roland--Roncesvalles.

Jebel el Tarik--Gibraltar.

Iskanderia--Alexandria.

"Ma sh' Allah!" (What does God mean!) the commonest exclamation of surprise.

Feringhi--Frankish, French.

Kafir--Infidel, heathen, a term of extreme contempt.

Ahmed ibn Said--Ahmed the son of Said.

THE EBBING TIDE

Hy-Brasail is the Celtic name for the Fortunate Islands, the Isles of Avilion, said to be situated
somewhere west of Europe. The dead were said to go westward to these islands, which were a
paradise.

THE END OF A PILGRIMAGE

John de Matha founded the Order of the Holy Trinity, sometimes known as the Redemptorist Fathers,
sometimes as the Mathurins. He was afterward made a saint. He was the first to make any serious
effort to alleviate the condition of prisoners, especially slaves among the Moslems.

The legend of the Star of Bethlehem referred to is one which is still current in India.

