He raised his head abruptly, and she saw the blood mount under his fair skin. "Not be here?"
he exclaimed.

She met his look as steadily as she could. "I think of going away for awhile."

"Going away? Where? What is the matter--are you not well?"

There was her pretext--he had found it for her! Why should she not simply plead ill-health?
Afterward she would find a way of elaborating the details and making them plausible. But suddenly,
as she was about to speak, there came to her the feeling which, up to one fatal moment in their
lives, had always ruled their intercourse--the feeling that there must be truth, and absolute
truth, between them. Absolute, indeed, it could never be again, since he must never know of
the condition exacted by Mr. Langhope; but that, at the moment, seemed almost a secondary motive
compared to the deeper influences that were inexorably forcing them apart. At any rate, she
would trump up no trivial excuse for the step she had resolved on; there should be truth, if
not the whole truth, in this last decisive hour between them.

"Yes; I am quite well--at least my body is," she said quietly. "But I am tired, perhaps; my
mind has been going round too long in the same circle." She paused for a brief space, and then,
raising her head, and looking him straight in the eyes: "Has it not been so with you?" she asked.

The question seemed to startle Amherst. He rose from his chair and took a few steps toward
the hearth, where a small fire was crumbling into embers. He turned his back to it, resting
an arm on the mantel-shelf; then he said, in a somewhat unsteady tone: "I thought we had agreed
not to speak of all that again."

Justine shook her head with a fugitive half-smile. "I made no such agreement. And besides,
what is the use, when we can always hear each other's thoughts speak, and they speak of nothing
else?"

Amherst's brows darkened. "It is not so with mine," he began; but she raised her hand with
a silencing gesture.

"I know you have tried your best that it should not be so; and perhaps you have succeeded better
than I. But I am tired, horribly tired--I want to get away from everything!"

She saw a look of pain in his eyes. He continued to lean against the mantel-shelf, his head
slightly lowered, his unseeing gaze fixed on a remote scroll in the pattern of the carpet;
then he said in a low tone: "I can only repeat again what I have said before--that I understand
why you did what you did."

"Thank you," she answered, in the same tone.

There was another pause, for she could not trust herself to go on speaking; and presently he
asked, with a tinge of bitterness in his voice: "That does not satisfy you?"

She hesitated. "It satisfies me as much as it does you--and no more," she replied at length.

He looked up hastily. "What do you mean?"

"Just what I say. We can neither of us go on living on that understanding just at present."
She rose as she spoke, and crossed over to the hearth. "I want to go back to my nursing--to
go out to Michigan, to a town where I spent a few months the year before I first came to Hanaford.
I have friends there, and can get work easily. And you can tell people that I was ill and needed
a change."

It had been easier to say than she had imagined, and her voice held its clear note till the
end; but when she had ceased, the whole room began to reverberate with her words, and through
the clashing they made in her brain she felt a sudden uncontrollable longing that they should
provoke in him a cry of protest, of resistance. Oh, if he refused to let her go--if he caught
her to him, and defied the world to part them--what then of her pledge to Mr. Langhope, what
then of her resolve to pay the penalty alone?

But in the space of a heart-beat she knew that peril--that longed-for peril!--was past. Her
husband had remained silent--he neither moved toward her nor looked at her; and she felt in
every slackening nerve that in the end he would let her go.

XL

MR. LANGHOPE, tossing down a note on Mrs. Ansell's drawing-room table, commanded imperiously:
"Read that!"

She set aside her tea-cup, and looked up, not at the note, but into his face, which was crossed
by one of the waves of heat and tremulousness that she was beginning to fear for him. Mr. Langhope
had changed greatly in the last three months; and as he stood there in the clear light of the
June afternoon it came to her that he had at last suffered the sudden collapse which is the
penalty of youth preserved beyond its time.

"What is it?" she asked, still watching him as she put out her hand for the letter.

"Amherst writes to remind me of my promise to take Cicely to Hanaford next week, for her birthday."

"Well--it was a promise, wasn't it?" she rejoined, running her eyes over the page.

"A promise--yes; but made before.... Read the note--you'll see there's no reference to his
wife. For all I know, she'll be there to receive us."

"But that was a promise too."

"That neither Cicely nor I should ever set eyes on her? Yes. But why should she keep it? I
was a fool that day--she fooled me as she's fooled us all! But you saw through it from the
beginning--you said at once that she'd never leave him."

Mrs. Ansell reflected. "I said that before I knew all the circumstances. Now I think differently."

"You think she still means to go?"

She handed the letter back to him. "I think this is to tell you so."

"This?" He groped for his glasses, dubiously scanning the letter again.

"Yes. And what's more, if you refuse to go she'll have every right to break her side of the
agreement."

Mr. Langhope sank into a chair, steadying himself painfully with his stick. "Upon my soul,
I sometimes think you're on her side!" he ejaculated.

"No--but I like fair play," she returned, measuring his tea carefully into his favourite little
porcelain tea-pot.

"Fair play?"

"She's offering to do her part. It's for you to do yours now--to take Cicely to Hanaford."

"If I find her there, I never cross Amherst's threshold again!"

Mrs. Ansell, without answering, rose and put his tea-cup on the slender-legged table at his
elbow; then, before returning to her seat, she found the enamelled match-box and laid it by
the cup. It was becoming difficult for Mr. Langhope to guide his movements about her small
encumbered room; and he had always liked being waited on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Ansell's prognostication proved correct. When Mr. Langhope and Cicely arrived at Hanaford
they found Amherst alone to receive them. He explained briefly that his wife had been unwell,
and had gone to seek rest and change at the house of an old friend in the west. Mr. Langhope
expressed a decent amount of regret, and the subject was dropped as if by common consent. Cicely,
however, was not so easily silenced. Poor Bessy's uncertain fits of tenderness had produced
more bewilderment than pleasure in her sober-minded child; but the little girl's feelings and
perceptions had developed rapidly in the equable atmosphere of her step-mother's affection.
Cicely had reached the age when children put their questions with as much ingenuity as persistence,
and both Mr. Langhope and Amherst longed for Mrs. Ansell's aid in parrying her incessant interrogations
as to the cause and length of Justine's absence, what she had said before going, and what promise
she had made about coming back. But Mrs. Ansell had not come to Hanaford. Though it had become
a matter of habit to include her in the family pilgrimages to the mills she had firmly maintained
the plea of more urgent engagements; and the two men, with only Cicely between them, had spent
the long days and longer evenings in unaccustomed and unmitigated propinquity.

Mr. Langhope, before leaving, thought it proper to touch tentatively on his promise of giving
Cicely to Amherst for the summer; but to his surprise the latter, after a moment of hesitation,
replied that he should probably go to Europe for two or three months.

"To Europe? Alone?" escaped from Mr. Langhope before he had time to weigh his words.

Amherst frowned slightly. "I have been made a delegate to the Berne conference on the housing
of factory operatives," he said at length, without making a direct reply to the question; "and
if there is nothing to keep me at Westmore, I shall probably go out in July." He waited a moment,
and then added: "My wife has decided to spend the summer in Michigan."

Mr. Langhope's answer was a vague murmur of assent, and Amherst turned the talk to other matters.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Langhope returned to town with distinct views on the situation at Hanaford.

"Poor devil--I'm sorry for him: he can hardly speak of her," he broke out at once to Mrs. Ansell,
in the course of their first confidential hour together.

"Because he cares too much--he's too unhappy?"

"Because he loathes her!" Mr. Langhope brought out with emphasis.

Mrs. Ansell drew a deep sigh which made him add accusingly: "I believe you're actually sorry!"

"Sorry?" She raised her eye-brows with a slight smile. "Should one not always be sorry to know
there's a little less love and a little more hate in the world?"

"You'll be asking me not to hate her next!"

She still continued to smile on him. "It's the haters, not the hated, I'm sorry for," she said
at length; and he flung back impatiently: "Oh, don't let's talk of her. I sometimes feel she
takes up more place in our lives than when she was with us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Amherst went to the Berne conference in July, and spent six weeks afterward in rapid visits
to various industrial centres and model factory villages. During his previous European pilgrimages
his interest had by no means been restricted to sociological questions: the appeal of an old
civilization, reaching him through its innumerable forms of tradition and beauty, had roused
that side of his imagination which his work at home left untouched. But upon his present state
of deep moral commotion the spells of art and history were powerless to work. The foundations
of his life had been shaken, and the fair exterior of the world was as vacant as a maniac's
face. He could only take refuge in his special task, barricading himself against every expression
of beauty and poetry as so many poignant reminders of a phase of life that he was vainly trying
to cast off and forget.

Even his work had been embittered to him, thrust out of its place in the ordered scheme of
things. It had cost him a hard struggle to hold fast to his main purpose, to convince himself
that his real duty lay, not in renouncing the Westmore money and its obligations, but in carrying
out his projected task as if nothing had occurred to affect his personal relation to it. The
mere fact that such a renunciation would have been a deliberate moral suicide, a severing once
for all of every artery of action, made it take on, at first, the semblance of an obligation,
a sort of higher duty to the abstract conception of what he owed himself. But Justine had not
erred in her forecast. Once she had passed out of his life, it was easier for him to return
to a dispassionate view of his situation, to see, and boldly confess to himself that he saw,
the still higher duty of sticking to his task, instead of sacrificing it to any ideal of personal
disinterestedness. It was this gradual process of adjustment that saved him from the desolating
scepticism which falls on the active man when the sources of his activity are tainted. Having
accepted his fate, having consented to see in himself merely the necessary agent of a good
to be done, he could escape from self-questioning only by shutting himself up in the practical
exigencies of his work, closing his eyes and his thoughts to everything which had formerly
related it to a wider world, had given meaning and beauty to life as a whole.

The return from Europe, and the taking up of the daily routine at Hanaford, were the most difficult
phases in this process of moral adaptation.

Justine's departure had at first brought relief. He had been too sincere with himself to oppose
her wish to leave Hanaford for a time, since he believed that, for her as well as for himself,
a temporary separation would be less painful than a continuance of their actual relation. But
as the weeks passed into months he found he was no nearer to a clear view of his own case:
the future was still dark and enigmatic. Justine's desire to leave him had revived his unformulated
distrust of her. What could it mean but that there were thoughts within her which could not
be at rest in his presence? He had given her every proof of his wish to forget the past, and
Mr. Langhope had behaved with unequalled magnanimity. Yet Justine's unhappiness was evident:
she could not conceal her longing to escape from the conditions her act had created. Was it
because, in reality, she was conscious of other motives than the one she acknowledged? She
had insisted, almost unfeelingly as it might have seemed, on the abstract rightness of what
she had done, on the fact that, ideally speaking, her act could not be made less right, less
justifiable, by the special accidental consequences that had flowed from it. Because these
consequences had caught her in a web of tragic fatality she would not be guilty of the weakness
of tracing back the disaster to any intrinsic error in her original motive. Why, then, if this
was her real, her proud attitude toward the past--and since those about her believed in her
sincerity, and accepted her justification as valid from her point of view if not from theirs--why
had she not been able to maintain her posture, to carry on life on the terms she had exacted
from others?

A special circumstance contributed to this feeling of distrust; the fact, namely, that Justine,
a week after her departure from Hanaford, had written to say that she could not, from that
moment till her return, consent to accept any money from Amherst. As her manner was, she put
her reasons clearly and soberly, without evasion or ambiguity.

"Since you and I," she wrote, "have always agreed in regarding the Westmore money as a kind
of wage for our services at the mills, I cannot be satisfied to go on drawing that wage while
I am unable to do any work in return. I am sure you must feel as I do about this; and you need
have no anxiety as to the practical side of the question, since I have enough to live on in
some savings from my hospital days, which were invested for me two years ago by Harry Dressel,
and are beginning to bring in a small return. This being the case, I feel I can afford to interpret
in any way I choose the terms of the bargain between myself and Westmore."

On reading this, Amherst's mind had gone through the strange dual process which now marked
all his judgments of his wife. At first he had fancied he understood her, and had felt that
he should have done as she did; then the usual reaction of distrust set in, and he asked himself
why she, who had so little of the conventional attitude toward money, should now develop this
unexpected susceptibility. And so the old question presented itself in another shape: if she
had nothing to reproach herself for, why was it intolerable to her to live on Bessy's money?
The fact that she was doing no actual service at Westmore did not account for her scruples--she
would have been the last person to think that a sick servant should be docked of his pay. Her
reluctance could come only from that hidden cause of compunction which had prompted her departure,
and which now forced her to sever even the merely material links between herself and her past.

Amherst, on his return to Hanaford, had tried to find in these considerations a reason for
his deep unrest. It was his wife's course which still cast a torturing doubt on what he had
braced his will to accept and put behind him. And he now told himself that the perpetual galling
sense of her absence was due to this uneasy consciousness of what it meant, of the dark secrets
it enveloped and held back from him. In actual truth, every particle of his being missed her,
he lacked her at every turn. She had been at once the partner of his task, and the pays bleu
into which he escaped from it; the vivifying thought which gave meaning to the life he had
chosen, yet never let him forget that there was a larger richer life outside, to which he was
rooted by deeper and more intrinsic things than any abstract ideal of altruism. His love had
preserved his identity, saved him from shrinking into the mere nameless unit which the social
enthusiast is in danger of becoming unless the humanitarian passion is balanced, and a little
overweighed, by a merely human one. And now this equilibrium was lost forever, and his deepest
pain lay in realizing that he could not regain it, even by casting off Westmore and choosing
the narrower but richer individual existence that her love might once have offered. His life
was in truth one indivisible organism, not two halves artificially united. Self and other-self
were ingrown from the roots--whichever portion fate restricted him to would be but a mutilated
half-live fragment of the whole.

Happily for him, chance made this crisis of his life coincide with a strike at Westmore. Soon
after his return to Hanaford he found himself compelled to grapple with the hardest problem
of his industrial career, and he was carried through the ensuing three months on that tide
of swift obligatory action that sweeps the ship-wrecked spirit over so many sunken reefs of
fear and despair. The knowledge that he was better able to deal with the question than any
one who might conceivably have taken his place--this conviction, which was presently confirmed
by the peaceable adjustment of the strike, helped to make the sense of his immediate usefulness
outbalance that other, disintegrating doubt as to the final value of such efforts. And so he
tried to settle down into a kind of mechanical altruism, in which the reflexes of habit should
take the place of that daily renewal of faith and enthusiasm which had been fed from the springs
of his own joy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The autumn came and passed into winter; and after Mr. Langhope's re-establishment in town Amherst
began to resume his usual visits to his step-daughter.

His natural affection for the little girl had been deepened by the unforeseen manner in which
her fate had been entrusted to him. The thought of Bessy, softened to compunction by the discovery
that her love had persisted under their apparently hopeless estrangement--this feeling, intensified
to the verge of morbidness by the circumstances attending her death, now sought expression
in a passionate devotion to her child. Accident had, in short, created between Bessy and himself
a retrospective sympathy which the resumption of life together would have dispelled in a week--one
of the exhalations from the past that depress the vitality of those who linger too near the
grave of dead experiences.

Since Justine's departure Amherst had felt himself still more drawn to Cicely; but his relation
to the child was complicated by the fact that she would not be satisfied as to the cause of
her step-mother's absence. Whenever Amherst came to town, her first question was for Justine;
and her memory had the precocious persistence sometimes developed in children too early deprived
of their natural atmosphere of affection. Cicely had always been petted and adored, at odd
times and by divers people; but some instinct seemed to tell her that, of all the tenderness
bestowed on her, Justine's most resembled the all-pervading motherly element in which the child's
heart expands without ever being conscious of its needs.

If it had been embarrassing to evade Cicely's questions in June it became doubly so as the
months passed, and the pretext of Justine's ill-health grew more and more difficult to sustain.
And in the following March Amherst was suddenly called from Hanaford by the news that the little
girl herself was ill. Serious complications had developed from a protracted case of scarlet
fever, and for two weeks the child's fate was uncertain. Then she began to recover, and in
the joy of seeing life come back to her, Mr. Langhope and Amherst felt as though they must
not only gratify every wish she expressed, but try to guess at those they saw floating below
the surface of her clear vague eyes.

It was noticeable to Mrs. Ansell, if not to the others, that one of these unexpressed wishes
was the desire to see her stepmother. Cicely no longer asked for Justine; but something in
her silence, or in the gesture with which she gently put from her other offers of diversion
and companionship, suddenly struck Mrs. Ansell as more poignant than speech.

"What is it the child wants?" she asked the governess, in the course of one of their whispered
consultations; and the governess, after a moment's hesitation, replied: "She said something
about a letter she wrote to Mrs. Amherst just before she was taken ill--about having had no
answer, I think."

"Ah--she writes to Mrs. Amherst, does she?"

The governess, evidently aware that she trod on delicate ground, tried at once to defend herself
and her pupil.

"It was my fault, perhaps. I suggested once that her little compositions should take the form
of letters--it usually interests a child more--and she asked if they might be written to Mrs.
Amherst."

"Your fault? Why should not the child write to her step-mother?" Mrs. Ansell rejoined with
studied surprise; and on the other's murmuring: "Of course--of course----" she added haughtily:
"I trust the letters were sent?"

The governess floundered. "I couldn't say--but perhaps the nurse...."

       *       *       *       *       *

That evening Cicely was less well. There was a slight return of fever, and the doctor, hastily
summoned, hinted at the possibility of too much excitement in the sick-room.

"Excitement? There has been no excitement," Mr. Langhope protested, quivering with the sudden
renewal of fear.

"No? The child seemed nervous, uneasy. It's hard to say why, because she is unusually reserved
for her age."

The medical man took his departure, and Mr. Langhope and Mrs. Ansell faced each other in the
disarray produced by a call to arms when all has seemed at peace.

"I shall lose her--I shall lose her!" the grandfather broke out, sinking into his chair with
a groan.

Mrs. Ansell, gathering up her furs for departure, turned on him abruptly from the threshold.

"It's stupid, what you're doing--stupid!" she exclaimed with unwonted vehemence.

He raised his head with a startled look. "What do you mean--what I'm doing?"

"The child misses Justine. You ought to send for her."

Mr. Langhope's hands dropped to the arms of his chair, and he straightened himself up with
a pale flash of indignation. "You've had moments lately----!"

"I've had moments, yes; and so have you--when the child came back to us, and we stood there
and wondered how we could keep her, tie her fast...and in those moments I saw...saw what she
wanted...and so did you!"

Mr. Langhope turned away his head. "You're a sentimentalist!" he flung scornfully back.

"Oh, call me any bad names you please!"

"I won't send for that woman!"

"No." She fastened her furs slowly, with the gentle deliberate movements that no emotion ever
hastened or disturbed.

"Why do you say no?" he challenged her.

"To make you contradict me, perhaps," she ventured, after looking at him again.

"Ah----" He shifted his position, one elbow supporting his bowed head, his eyes fixed on the
ground. Presently he brought out: "Could one ask her to come--and see the child--and go away
again--for good?"

"To break the compact at your pleasure, and enter into it again for the same reason?"

"No--no--I see." He paused, and then looked up at her suddenly. "But what if Amherst won't
have her back himself?"

"Shall I ask him?"

"I tell you he can't bear to hear her name!"

"But he doesn't know why she has left him."

Mr. Langhope gathered his brows in a frown. "Why--what on earth--what possible difference would
that make?"

Mrs. Ansell, from the doorway, shed a pitying glance on him. "Ah--if you don't see!" she murmured.

He sank back into his seat with a groan. "Good heavens, Maria, how you torture me! I see enough
as it is--I see too much of the cursed business!"

She paused again, and then slowly moved a step or two nearer, laying her hand on his shoulder.

"There's one thing you've never seen yet, Henry: what Bessy herself would do now--for the child--if
she could."

He sat motionless under her light touch, his eyes on hers, till their inmost thoughts felt
for and found each other, as they still sometimes could, through the fog of years and selfishness
and worldly habit; then he dropped his face into his hands, hiding it from her with the instinctive
shrinking of an aged grief.

XLI

AMHERST, Cicely's convalescence once assured, had been obliged to go back to Hanaford; but
some ten days later, on hearing from Mrs. Ansell that the little girl's progress was less rapid
than had been hoped, he returned to his father-in-law's for a Sunday.

He came two days after the talk recorded in the last chapter--a talk of which Mrs. Ansell's
letter to him had been the direct result. She had promised Mr. Langhope that, in writing to
Amherst, she would not go beyond the briefest statement of fact; and she had kept her word,
trusting to circumstances to speak for her.

Mrs. Ansell, during Cicely's illness, had formed the habit of dropping in on Mr. Langhope at
the tea hour instead of awaiting him in her own drawing-room; and on the Sunday in question
she found him alone. Beneath his pleasure in seeing her, which had grown more marked as his
dependence on her increased, she at once discerned traces of recent disturbance; and her first
question was for Cicely.

He met it with a discouraged gesture. "No great change--Amherst finds her less well than when
he was here before."

"He's upstairs with her?"

"Yes--she seems to want him."

Mrs. Ansell seated herself in silence behind the tea-tray, of which she was now recognized
as the officiating priestess. As she drew off her long gloves, and mechanically straightened
the row of delicate old cups, Mr. Langhope added with an effort: "I've spoken to him--told
him what you said."

She looked up quickly.

"About the child's wish," he continued. "About her having written to his wife. It seems her
last letters have not been answered."

He paused, and Mrs. Ansell, with her usual calm precision, proceeded to measure the tea into
the fluted Georgian tea-pot. She could be as reticent in approval as in reprehension, and not
for the world would she have seemed to claim any share in the turn that events appeared to
be taking. She even preferred the risk of leaving her old friend to add half-reproachfully:
"I told Amherst what you and the nurse thought."

"Yes?"

"That Cicely pines for his wife. I put it to him in black and white." The words came out on
a deep strained breath, and Mrs. Ansell faltered: "Well?"

"Well--he doesn't know where she is himself."

"Doesn't know?"

"They're separated--utterly separated. It's as I told you: he could hardly name her."

Mrs. Ansell had unconsciously ceased her ministrations, letting her hands fall on her knee
while she brooded in blank wonder on her companion's face.

"I wonder what reason she could have given him?" she murmured at length.

"For going? He loathes her, I tell you!"

"Yes--but how did she make him?"

He struck his hand violently on the arm of his chair. "Upon my soul, you seem to forget!"

"No." She shook her head with a half smile. "I simply remember more than you do."

"What more?" he began with a flush of anger; but she raised a quieting hand.

"What does all that matter--if, now that we need her, we can't get her?"

He made no answer, and she returned to the dispensing of his tea; but as she rose to put the
cup in his hand he asked, half querulously: "You think it's going to be very bad for the child,
then?"

Mrs. Ansell smiled with the thin edge of her lips. "One can hardly set the police after her----!"

"No; we're powerless," he groaned in assent.

As the cup passed between them she dropped her eyes to his with a quick flash of interrogation;
but he sat staring moodily before him, and she moved back to the sofa without a word.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the way downstairs she met Amherst descending from Cicely's room.

Since the early days of his first marriage there had always been, on Amherst's side, a sense
of obscure antagonism toward Mrs. Ansell. She was almost the embodied spirit of the world he
dreaded and disliked: her serenity, her tolerance, her adaptability, seemed to smile away and
disintegrate all the high enthusiasms, the stubborn convictions, that he had tried to plant
in the shifting sands of his married life. And now that Bessy's death had given her back the
attributes with which his fancy had originally invested her, he had come to regard Mrs. Ansell
as embodying the evil influences that had come between himself and his wife.

Mrs. Ansell was probably not unaware of the successive transitions of feeling which had led
up to this unflattering view; but her life had been passed among petty rivalries and animosities,
and she had the patience and adroitness of the spy in a hostile camp.

She and Amherst exchanged a few words about Cicely; then she exclaimed, with a glance through
the panes of the hall door: "But I must be off--I'm on foot, and the crossings appal me after
dark."

He could do no less, at that, than offer to guide her across the perils of Fifth Avenue; and
still talking of Cicely, she led him down the thronged thoroughfare till her own corner was
reached, and then her own door; turning there to ask, as if by an afterthought: "Won't you
come up? There's one thing more I want to say."

A shade of reluctance crossed his face, which, as the vestibule light fell on it, looked hard
and tired, like a face set obstinately against a winter gale; but he murmured a word of assent,
and followed her into the shining steel cage of the lift.

In her little drawing-room, among the shaded lamps and bowls of spring flowers, she pushed
a chair forward, settled herself in her usual corner of the sofa, and said with a directness
that seemed an echo of his own tone: "I asked you to come up because I want to talk to you
about Mr. Langhope."

Amherst looked at her in surprise. Though his father-in-law's health had been more or less
unsatisfactory for the last year, all their concern, of late, had been for Cicely.

"You think him less well?" he enquired.

She waited to draw off and smooth her gloves, with one of the deliberate gestures that served
to shade and supplement her speech.

"I think him extremely unhappy."

Amherst moved uneasily in his seat. He did not know where she meant the talk to lead them,
but he guessed that it would be over painful places, and he saw no reason why he should be
forced to follow her.

"You mean that he's still anxious about Cicely?"

"Partly that--yes." She paused. "The child will get well, no doubt; but she is very lonely.
She needs youth, heat, light. Mr. Langhope can't give her those, or even a semblance of them;
and it's an art I've lost the secret of," she added with her shadowy smile.

Amherst's brows darkened. "I realize all she has lost----"

Mrs. Ansell glanced up at him quickly. "She is twice motherless," she said.

The blood rose to his neck and temples, and he tightened his hand on the arm of his chair.
But it was a part of Mrs. Ansell's expertness to know when such danger signals must be heeded
and when they might be ignored, and she went on quietly: "It's the question of the future that
is troubling Mr. Langhope. After such an illness, the next months of Cicely's life should be
all happiness. And money won't buy the kind she needs: one can't pick out the right companion
for such a child as one can match a ribbon. What she wants is spontaneous affection, not the
most superlative manufactured article. She wants the sort of love that Justine gave her."

It was the first time in months that Amherst had heard his wife's name spoken outside of his
own house. No one but his mother mentioned Justine to him now; and of late even his mother
had dropped her enquiries and allusions, prudently acquiescing in the habit of silence which
his own silence had created about him. To hear the name again--the two little syllables which
had been the key of life to him, and now shook him as the turning of a rusted lock shakes a
long-closed door--to hear her name spoken familiarly, affectionately, as one speaks of some
one who may come into the room the next moment--gave him a shock that was half pain, and half
furtive unacknowledged joy. Men whose conscious thoughts are mostly projected outward, on the
world of external activities, may be more moved by such a touch on the feelings than those
who are perpetually testing and tuning their emotional chords. Amherst had foreseen from the
first that Mrs. Ansell might mean to speak of his wife; but though he had intended, if she
did so, to cut their talk short, he now felt himself irresistibly constrained to hear her out.

Mrs. Ansell, having sped her shaft, followed its flight through lowered lashes, and saw that
it had struck a vulnerable point; but she was far from assuming that the day was won.

"I believe," she continued, "that Mr. Langhope has said something of this to you already, and
my only excuse for speaking is that I understood he had not been successful in his appeal."

No one but Mrs. Ansell--and perhaps she knew it--could have pushed so far beyond the conventional
limits of discretion without seeming to overstep them by a hair; and she had often said, when
pressed for the secret of her art, that it consisted simply in knowing the pass-word. That
word once spoken, she might have added, the next secret was to give the enemy no time for resistance;
and though she saw the frown reappear between Amherst's eyes, she went on, without heeding
it: "I entreat you, Mr. Amherst, to let Cicely see your wife."

He reddened again, and pushed back his chair, as if to rise.

"No--don't break off like that! Let me say a word more. I know your answer to Mr. Langhope--that
you and Justine are no longer together. But I thought of you as a man to sink your personal
relations at such a moment as this."

"To sink them?" he repeated vaguely: and she went on: "After all, what difference does it make?"

"What difference?" He stared in unmitigated wonder, and then answered, with a touch of irony:
"It might at least make the difference of my being unwilling to ask a favour of her."

Mrs. Ansell, at this, raised her eyes and let them rest full on his. "Because she has done
you so great a one already?"

He stared again, sinking back automatically into his chair. "I don't understand you."

"No." She smiled a little, as if to give herself time. "But I mean that you shall. If I were
a man I suppose I couldn't, because a man's code of honour is such a clumsy cast-iron thing. Forty
shovelfuls of clinkers and twelve of slaked lime make 7 cwt. of mortar in thirty-five minutes
in each pan, which is sold at 5s. 6d. per ton.

The engine driving the two mortar mills has a 14 inch cylinder, 30 inches length of stroke,
and makes sixty revolutions per minute with 45 pounds steam pressure
per square inch in the boiler, when both mortar mills are running.

The boiler is 11 feet long, 8 feet in diameter, and has 132 tubes
4 inches in external diameter, which, together with the external flues,
are cleaned out once a month.

At first sight it would probably appear that no good mortar could
be made from such refuse as has been described, but having passed
through the furnace, the clinkers are, of course, perfectly clean,
and with good lime make a really strong and excellent mortar.

They are also largely used for the foundation of roadways.

The number of men employed is as follows: Two furnace men in the daytime
and two at night.

They work from midnight on Sundays to 2 P.M. on Saturdays, the fires
being fully charged and left to burn through the Sundays.

One foreman, who attends also to the running of the engine, and one mortar man. A watchman attends
while the workmen are off.

In addition to a destructor, there is at the Burmautofts depot a "carbonizer"
kiln, in which the sweepings of the vegetable markets are burned into
charcoal.

The carbonizer consists of eight vertical cells, in two sets or stacks of four, separated by
a space containing two double furnaces, back to back, there being a double furnace also at each
end of the eight cells

.


He dropped down beside her at that, grasping the back of the sofa as if he wanted something
to clutch and throttle. The veins swelled in his temples, and as he pushed back his tossed
hair Mrs. Ansell noticed for the first time how gray it had grown on the under side.

"And he asked this of my wife--he accepted it?'"

"Haven't you accepted it?"

"I? How could I guess her reasons--how could I imagine----?"

Mrs. Ansell raised her brows a hair's breadth at that. "I don't know. But as a fact, he didn't
ask--it was she who offered, who forced it on him, even!"

"Forced her going on him?"

"In a sense, yes; by making it appear that you felt as he did about--about poor Bessy's death:
that the thought of what had happened at that time was as abhorrent to you as to him--that
she was as abhorrent to you. No doubt she foresaw that, had she permitted the least doubt on
that point, there would have been no need of her leaving you, since the relation between yourself
and Mr. Langhope would have been altered--destroyed...."

"Yes. I expected that--I warned her of it. But how did she make him think----?"

"How can I tell? To begin with, I don't know your real feeling. For all I know she was telling
the truth--and Mr. Langhope of course thought she was."

"That I abhorred her? Oh----" he broke out, on his feet in an instant.

"Then why----?"

"Why did I let her leave me?" He strode across the room, as his habit was in moments of agitation,
turning back to her again before he answered. "Because I didn't know--didn't know anything!
And because her insisting on going away like that, without any explanation, made me feel...imagine
there was...something she didn't want me to know...something she was afraid of not being able
to hide from me if we stayed together any longer."

"Well--there was: the extent to which she loved you."

Mrs. Ansell; her hands clasped on her knee, her gaze holding his with a kind of visionary fixity,
seemed to reconstruct the history of his past, bit by bit, with the words she was dragging
out of him.

"I see it--I see it all now," she went on, with a repressed fervour that he had never divined
in her. "It was the only solution for her, as well as for the rest of you. The more she showed
her love, the more it would have cast a doubt on her motive...the greater distance she would
have put between herself and you. And so she showed it in the only way that was safe for both
of you, by taking herself away and hiding it in her heart; and before going, she secured your
peace of mind, your future. If she ruined anything, she rebuilt the ruin. Oh, she paid--she
paid in full!"

Justine had paid, yes--paid to the utmost limit of whatever debt toward society she had contracted
by overstepping its laws. And her resolve to discharge the debt had been taken in a flash,
as soon as she had seen that man can commit no act alone, whether for good or evil. The extent
to which Amherst's fate was involved in hers had become clear to her with his first word of
reassurance, of faith in her motive. And instantly a plan for releasing him had leapt full-formed
into her mind, and had been carried out with swift unflinching resolution. As he forced himself,
now, to look down the suddenly illuminated past to the weeks which had elapsed between her
visit to Mr. Langhope and her departure from Hanaford, he wondered not so much at her swiftness
of resolve as at her firmness in carrying out her plan--and he saw, with a blinding flash of
insight, that it was in her love for him that she had found her strength.

In all moments of strong mental tension he became totally unconscious of time and place, and
he now remained silent so long, his hands clasped behind him, his eyes fixed on an indeterminate
point in space, that Mrs. Ansell at length rose and laid a questioning touch on his arm.

"It's not true that you don't know where she is?" His face contracted. "At this moment I don't.
Lately she has preferred...not to write...."

"But surely you must know how to find her?"

He tossed back his hair with an energetic movement. "I should find her if I didn't know how!"

They stood confronted in a gaze of silent intensity, each penetrating farther into the mind
of the other than would once have seemed possible to either one; then Amherst held out his
hand abruptly. "Good-bye--and thank you," he said.

She detained him a moment. "We shall see you soon again--see you both?"

His face grew stern. "It's not to oblige Mr. Langhope that I am going to find my wife."

"Ah, now you are unjust to him!" she exclaimed.

"Don't let us speak of him!" he broke in.

"Why not? When it is from him the request comes--the entreaty--that everything in the past
should be forgotten?"

"Yes--when it suits his convenience!"

"Do you imagine that--even judging him in that way--it has not cost him a struggle?"

"I can only think of what it has cost her!"

Mrs. Ansell drew a deep sighing breath. "Ah--but don't you see that she has gained her point,
and that nothing else matters to her?"

"Gained her point? Not if, by that, you mean that things here can ever go back to the old state--that
she and I can remain at Westmore after this!"

Mrs. Ansell dropped her eyes for a moment; then she lifted to his her sweet impenetrable face.

"Do you know what you have to do--both you and he? Exactly what she decides," she affirmed.

XLII

JUSTINE'S answer to her husband's letter bore a New York address; and the surprise of finding
her in the same town with himself, and not half an hour's walk from the room in which he sat,
was so great that it seemed to demand some sudden and violent outlet of physical movement.

He thrust the letter in his pocket, took up his hat, and leaving the house, strode up Fifth
Avenue toward the Park in the early spring sunlight.

The news had taken five days to reach him, for in order to reestablish communication with his
wife he had been obliged to write to Michigan, with the request that his letter should be forwarded.
He had never supposed that Justine would be hard to find, or that she had purposely enveloped
her movements in mystery. If food is put away, it becomes mouldy. This mould is a peculiar kind
of vegetation which is called a fungus, and the plants fungi. In order for this mould to develop
a certain temperature and a certain degree of moisture are necessary. The inextricable mingling of thought
and sensation which made the peculiar closeness of their union could never, to such direct
and passionate natures, be replaced by the pretense of a temperate friendship. Feeling thus
himself, and instinctively assuming the same feeling in his wife, Amherst had respected her
silence, her wish to break definitely with their former life. She had written him, in the autumn,
that she intended to leave Michigan for a few months, but that, in any emergency, a letter
addressed to her friend's house would reach her; and he had taken this as meaning that, unless
the emergency arose, she preferred that their correspondence should cease. Acquiescence was
all the easier because it accorded with his own desire. It seemed to him, as he looked back,
that the love he and Justine had felt for each other was like some rare organism which could
maintain life only in its special element; and that element was neither passion nor sentiment,
but truth. It was only on the heights that they could breathe.

Some men, in his place, even while accepting the inevitableness of the moral rupture, would
have felt concerned for the material side of the case. But it was characteristic of Amherst
that this did not trouble him. He took it for granted that his wife would return to her nursing.
From the first he had felt certain that it would be intolerable to her to accept aid from him,
and that she would choose rather to support herself by the exercise of her regular profession;
and, aside from such motives, he, who had always turned to hard work as the rarest refuge from
personal misery, thought it natural that she should seek the same means of escape.

He had therefore not been surprised, on opening her letter that morning, to learn that she
had taken up her hospital work; but in the amazement of finding her so near he hardly grasped
her explanation of the coincidence. There was something about a Buffalo patient suddenly ordered
to New York for special treatment, and refusing to go in with a new nurse--but these details
made no impression on his mind, which had only room for the fact that chance had brought his
wife back at the very moment when his whole being yearned for her.

She wrote that, owing to her duties, she would be unable to see him till three that afternoon;
and he had still six hours to consume before their meeting. But in spirit they had met already--they
were one in an intensity of communion which, as he strode northward along the bright crowded
thoroughfare, seemed to gather up the whole world into one throbbing point of life.

He had a boyish wish to keep the secret of his happiness to himself, not to let Mr. Langhope
or Mrs. Ansell know of his meeting with Justine till it was over; and after twice measuring
the length of the Park he turned in at one of the little wooden restaurants which were beginning
to unshutter themselves in anticipation of spring custom. If only he could have seen Justine
that morning! If he could have brought her there, and they could have sat opposite each other,
in the bare empty room, with sparrows bustling and twittering in the lilacs against the open
window! The room was ugly enough--but how she would have delighted in the delicate green of
the near slopes, and the purplish haze of the woods beyond! She took a childish pleasure in
such small adventures, and had the knack of giving a touch of magic to their most commonplace
details. Amherst, as he finished his cold beef and indifferent eggs, found himself boyishly
planning to bring her back there the next day....

Then, over the coffee, he re-read her letter.

The address she gave was that of a small private hospital, and she explained that she would
have to receive him in the public parlour, which at that hour was open to other visitors. As
the time approached, the thought that they might not be alone when they met became insufferable;
and he determined, if he found any one else, in possession of the parlour, to wait in the hall,
and meet her as she came down the stairs.

He continued to elaborate this plan as he walked back slowly through the Park, He had timed
himself to reach the hospital a little before three; but though it lacked five minutes to the
hour when he entered the parlour, two women were already seated in one of its windows. They
looked around as he came in, evidently as much annoyed by his appearance as he had been to
find them there. The older of the two showed a sallow middle-aged face beneath her limp crape
veil; the other was a slight tawdry creature, with nodding feathers, and innumerable chains
and bracelets which she fingered ceaselessly as she talked.

They eyed Amherst with resentment, and then turned away, continuing their talk in low murmurs,
while he seated himself at the marble-topped table littered with torn magazines. Now and then
the younger woman's voice rose in a shrill staccato, and a phrase or two floated over to him.
"She'd simply worked herself to death--the nurse told me so.... She expects to go home in another
week, though how she's going to stand the fatigue----" and then, after an inaudible answer:
"It's all his fault, and if I was her I wouldn't go back to him for anything!"

"Oh, Cora, he's real sorry now," the older woman protestingly murmured; but the other, unappeased,
rejoined with ominously nodding plumes: "You see--if they do make it up, it'll never be the
same between them!"

Amherst started up nervously, and as he did so the clock struck three, and he opened the door
and passed out into the hall. It was paved with black and white marble; the walls were washed
in a dull yellowish tint, and the prevalent odour of antiseptics was mingled with a stale smell
of cooking. At the back rose a straight staircase carpeted with brass-bound India-rubber, like
a ship's companion-way; and down that staircase she would come in a moment--he fancied he heard
her step now....

But the step was that of an elderly black-gowned woman in a cap--the matron probably.

She glanced at Amherst in surprise, and asked: "Are you waiting for some one?"

He made a motion of assent, and she opened the parlour door, saying: "Please walk in."

"May I not wait out here?" he urged.

She looked at him more attentively. "Why, no, I'm afraid not. You'll find the papers and magazines
in here."

Mildly but firmly she drove him in before her, and closing the door, advanced to the two women
in the window. Amherst's hopes leapt up: perhaps she had come to fetch the visitors upstairs!
He strained his ears to catch what was being said, and while he was thus absorbed the door
opened, and turning at the sound he found himself face to face with his wife.

He had not reflected that Justine would be in her nurse's dress; and the sight of the dark
blue uniform and small white cap, in which he had never seen her since their first meeting
in the Hope Hospital, obliterated all bitter and unhappy memories, and gave him the illusion
of passing back at once into the clear air of their early friendship. Then he looked at her
and remembered.

He noticed that she had grown thinner than ever, or rather that her thinness, which had formerly
had a healthy reed-like strength, now suggested fatigue and languor. And her face was spent,
extinguished--the very eyes were lifeless. All her vitality seemed to have withdrawn itself
into the arch of dense black hair which still clasped her forehead like the noble metal of
some antique bust.

The sight stirred him with a deeper pity, a more vehement compunction; but the impulse to snatch
her to him, and seek his pardon on her lips, was paralyzed by the sense that the three women
in the window had stopped talking and turned their heads toward the door.

He held his hand out, and Justine's touched it for a moment; then he said in a low voice: "Is
there no other place where I can see you?"

She made a negative gesture. "I am afraid not to-day."

Ah, her deep sweet voice--how completely his ear had lost the sound of it!

She looked doubtfully about the room, and pointed to a sofa at the end farthest from the windows.

"Shall we sit there?" she said.

He followed her in silence, and they sat down side by side. The matron had drawn up a chair
and resumed her whispered conference with the women in the window. Between the two groups stretched
the bare length of the room, broken only by a few arm-chairs of stained wood, and the marble-topped
table covered with magazines.

The impossibility of giving free rein to his feelings developed in Amherst an unwonted intensity
of perception, as though a sixth sense had suddenly emerged to take the place of those he could
not use. And with this new-made faculty he seemed to gather up, and absorb into himself, as
he had never done in their hours of closest communion, every detail of his wife's person, of
her face and hands and gestures. He noticed how her full upper lids, of the tint of yellowish
ivory, had a slight bluish discolouration, and how little thread-like blue veins ran across
her temples to the roots of her hair. The emaciation of her face, and the hollow shades beneath
her cheek-bones, made her mouth seem redder and fuller, though a little line on each side,
where it joined the cheek, gave it a tragic droop. And her hands! When her fingers met his
he recalled having once picked up, in the winter woods, the little feather-light skeleton of
a frozen bird--and that was what her touch was like.

And it was he who had brought her to this by his cruelty, his obtuseness, his base readiness
to believe the worst of her! He did not want to pour himself out in self-accusation--that seemed
too easy a way of escape. He wanted simply to take her in his arms, to ask her to give him
one more chance--and then to show her! And all the while he was paralyzed by the group in the
window.

"Can't we go out? I must speak to you," he began again nervously.

"Not this afternoon--the doctor is coming. Tomorrow----"

"I can't wait for tomorrow!"

She made a faint, imperceptible gesture, which read to his eyes: "You've waited a whole year."

"Yes, I know," he returned, still constrained by the necessity of muffling his voice, of perpetually
measuring the distance between themselves and the window. "I know what you might say--don't
you suppose I've said it to myself a million times? But I didn't know--I couldn't imagine----"

She interrupted him with a rapid movement. "What do you know now?"

"What you promised Langhope----"

She turned her startled eyes on him, and he saw the blood run flame-like under her skin. "But
he promised not to speak!" she cried.

"He hasn't--to me. But such things make themselves known. Should you have been content to go
on in that way forever?"

She raised her head and her eyes rested in his. "If you were," she answered simply.

"Justine!"

Again she checked him with a silencing motion. "Please tell me just what has happened."

"Not now--there's too much else to say. And nothing matters except that I'm with you."

"But Mr. Langhope----"

"He asks you to come. You're to see Cicely to-morrow."

Her lower lip trembled a little, and a tear flowed over and hung on her lashes.

"But what does all that matter now? We're together after this horrible year," he insisted.

She looked at him again. "But what is really changed?"

"Everything--everything! Not changed, I mean--just gone back."

"To where...we were...before?" she whispered; and he whispered back: "To where we were before."

There was a scraping of chairs on the floor, and with a sense of release Amherst saw that the
colloquy in the window was over.

The two visitors, gathering their wraps about them, moved slowly across the room, still talking
to the matron in excited undertones, through which, as they neared the threshold, the younger
woman's staccato again broke out.

"I tell you, if she does go back to him, it'll never be the same between them!"

"Oh, Cora, I wouldn't say that," the other ineffectually wailed; then they moved toward the
door, and a moment later it had closed on them.

Amherst turned to his wife with outstretched arms. "Say you forgive me, Justine!"

She held back a little from his entreating hands, not reproachfully, but as if with a last
scruple for himself.

"There's nothing left...of the horror?" she asked below her breath.

"To be without you--that's the only horror!"

"You're sure----?"

"Sure!"

"It's just the same to you...just as it was...before?"

"Just the same, Justine!"

"It's not for myself, but you."

"Then, for me--never speak of it!" he implored.

"Because it's not the same, then?" leapt from her.

"Because it's wiped out--because it's never been!"

"Never?"

"Never!"

He felt her yield to him at that, and under his eyes, close under his lips, was her face at
last. But as they kissed they heard the handle of the door turn, and drew apart quickly, her
hand lingering in his under the fold of her dress.

A nurse looked in, dressed in the white uniform and pointed cap of the hospital. Amherst fancied
that she smiled a little as she saw them.

"Miss Brent--the doctor wants you to come right up and give the morphine."

The door shut again as Justine rose to her feet. Amherst remained seated--he had made no motion
to retain her hand as it slipped from him.

"I'm coming," she called out to the retreating nurse; then she turned slowly and saw her husband's
face.

"I must go," she said in a low tone. 

The example which we now illustrate, in Fig. 1, is a sectional presentment
precisely half the actual size of a 5-foot burner, which it is intended
to prepare for the market before all others.

Another simple form of the burner, with vertical tubes, will, we
understand, be introduced as soon as possible.

It will be readily understood that the principle is capable of being
embodied in many shapes; and it is satisfactory to learn that the
inventor is quite alive to the necessity of producing a cheap as well
as a good burner.

 The anniversary was to coincide, this year,
with the opening of the old house at Hopewood, as a kind of pleasure-palace--gymnasium, concert-hall
and museum--for the recreation of the mill-hands.

The idea had first come to Amherst on the winter afternoon when Bessy Westmore had confessed
her love for him under the snow-laden trees of Hopewood. Even then the sense that his personal
happiness was enlarged and secured by its promise of happiness to others had made him wish
that the scene associated with the opening of his new life should be made to commemorate a
corresponding change in the fortunes of Westmore. But when the control of the mills passed
into his hands other and more necessary improvements pressed upon him; and it was not till
now that the financial condition of the company had permitted the execution of his plan.

Justine, on her return to Hanaford, had found the work already in progress, and had been told
by her husband that he was carrying out a projected scheme of Bessy's. She had felt a certain
surprise, but had concluded that the plan in question dated back to the early days of his first
marriage, when, in his wife's eyes, his connection with the mills still invested them with
interest.

Since Justine had come back to her husband, both had tacitly avoided all allusions to the past,
and the recreation-house at Hopewood being, as she divined, in some sort an expiatory offering
to Bessy's plaintive shade, she had purposely refrained from questioning Amherst about its
progress, and had simply approved the plans he submitted to her.

Fourteen months had passed since her return, and now, as she sat beside her husband in the
carriage which was conveying them to Hopewood, she said to herself that her life had at last
fallen into what promised to be its final shape--that as things now were they would probably
be to the end. And outwardly at least they were what she and Amherst had always dreamed of
their being. Westmore prospered under the new rule. The seeds of life they had sown there were
springing up in a promising growth of bodily health and mental activity, and above all in a
dawning social consciousness. The mill-hands were beginning to understand the meaning of their
work, in its relation to their own lives and to the larger economy. And outwardly, also, the
new growth was showing itself in the humanized aspect of the place. Amherst's young maples
were tall enough now to cast a shade on the grass-bordered streets; and the well-kept turf,
the bright cottage gardens, the new central group of library, hospital and club-house, gave
to the mill-village the hopeful air of a "rising" residential suburb.

In the bright June light, behind their fresh green mantle of trees and creepers, even the factory
buildings looked less stern and prison-like than formerly; and the turfing and planting of
the adjoining river-banks had transformed a waste of foul mud and refuse into a little park
where the operatives might refresh themselves at midday.

Yes--Westmore was alive at last: the dead city of which Justine had once spoken had risen from
its grave, and its blank face had taken on a meaning. As Justine glanced at her husband she
saw that the same thought was in his mind. However achieved, at whatever cost of personal misery
and error, the work of awakening and freeing Westmore was done, and that work had justified itself.

She looked from Amherst to Cicely, who sat opposite, eager and rosy in her mourning frock--for
Mr. Langhope had died some two months previously--and as intent as her step-parents on the
scene before her. Cicely was old enough now to regard her connection with Westmore as something
more than a nursery game. She was beginning to learn a great deal about the mills, and to understand,
in simple, friendly ways, something of her own relation to them. The work and play of the children,
the interests and relaxations provided for their elders, had been gradually explained to her
by Justine, and she knew that this shining tenth birthday of hers was to throw its light as
far as the clouds of factory-smoke extended.

As they mounted the slope to Hopewood, the spacious white building, with its enfolding colonnades,
its broad terraces and tennis-courts, shone through the trees like some bright country-house
adorned for its master's home-coming; and Amherst and his wife might have been driving up to
the house which had been built to shelter their wedded happiness. The thought flashed across
Justine as their carriage climbed the hill. She was as much absorbed as Amherst in the welfare
of Westmore, it had become more and more, to both, the refuge in which their lives still met
and mingled; but for a moment, as they paused before the flower-decked porch, and he turned
to help her from the carriage, it occurred to her to wonder what her sensations would have
been if he had been bringing her home--to a real home of their own--instead of accompanying
her to another philanthropic celebration. But what need had they of a real home, when they
no longer had any real life of their own? Nothing was left of that secret inner union which
had so enriched and beautified their outward lives. Since Justine's return to Hanaford they
had entered, tacitly, almost unconsciously, into a new relation to each other: a relation in
which their personalities were more and more merged in their common work, so that, as it were,
they met only by avoiding each other.

From the first, Justine had accepted this as inevitable; just as she had understood, when Amherst
had sought her out in New York, that his remaining at Westmore, which had once been contingent
on her leaving him, now depended on her willingness to return and take up their former life.

She accepted the last condition as she had accepted the other, pledged to the perpetual expiation
of an act for which, in the abstract, she still refused to hold herself to blame. But life
is not a matter of abstract principles, but a succession of pitiful compromises with fate,
of concessions to old tradition, old beliefs, old charities and frailties. That was what her
act had taught her--that was the word of the gods to the mortal who had laid a hand on their
bolts. And she had humbled herself to accept the lesson, seeing human relations at last as
a tangled and deep-rooted growth, a dark forest through which the idealist cannot cut his straight
path without hearing at each stroke the cry of the severed branch: "Why woundest thou me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The lawns leading up to the house were already sprinkled with holiday-makers, while along the
avenue came the rolling of wheels, the throb of motor-cars; and Justine, with Cicely beside
her, stood in the wide hall to receive the incoming throng, in which Hanaford society was indiscriminately
mingled with the operatives in their Sunday best.

While his wife welcomed the new arrivals, Amherst, supported by some young Westmore cousins,
was guiding them into the concert-hall, where he was to say a word on the uses of the building
before declaring it open for inspection. And presently Justine and Cicely, summoned by Westy
Gaines, made their way through the rows of seats to a corner near the platform. Her husband
was there already, with Halford Gaines and a group of Hanaford dignitaries, and just below
them sat Mrs. Gaines and her daughters, the Harry Dressels, and Amherst's radiant mother.

As Justine passed between them, she wondered how much they knew of the events which had wrought
so profound and permanent change in her life. She had never known how Hanaford explained her
absence or what comments it had made on her return. But she saw to-day more clearly than ever
that Amherst had become a power among his townsmen, and that if they were still blind to the
inner meaning of his work, its practical results were beginning to impress them profoundly.
Hanaford's sociological creed was largely based on commercial considerations, and Amherst had
won Hanaford's esteem by the novel feat of defying its economic principles and snatching success
out of his defiance.

And now he had advanced a step or two in front of the "representative" semi-circle on the platform,
and was beginning to speak.

Justine did not hear his first words. She was looking up at him, trying to see him with the
eyes of the crowd, and wondering what manner of man he would have seemed to her if she had
known as little as they did of his inner history.

He held himself straight, the heavy locks thrown back from his forehead, one hand resting on
the table beside him, the other grasping a folded blue-print which the architect of the building
had just advanced to give him. As he stood there, Justine recalled her first sight of him in
the Hope Hospital, five years earlier--was it only five years? They had dealt deep strokes
to his face, hollowing the eye-sockets, accentuating the strong modelling of nose and chin,
fixing the lines between the brows; but every touch had a meaning--it was not the languid hand
of time which had remade his features, but the sharp chisel of thought and action.

She roused herself suddenly to the consciousness of what he was saying.

"For the idea of this building--of a building dedicated to the recreation of Westmore--is not
new in my mind; but while it remained there as a mere idea, it had already, without my knowledge,
taken definite shape in the thoughts of the owner of Westmore."

There was a slight drop in his voice as he designated Bessy, and he waited a moment before
continuing: "It was not till after the death of my first wife that I learned of her intention--that
I found by accident, among her papers, this carefully-studied plan for a pleasure-house at
Hopewood."

He paused again, and unrolling the blue-print, held it up before his audience.

"You cannot, at this distance," he went on, "see all the admirable details of her plan; see
how beautifully they were imagined, how carefully and intelligently elaborated. She who conceived
them longed to see beauty everywhere--it was her dearest wish to bestow it on her people here.
And her ardent imagination outran the bounds of practical possibility. We cannot give you,
in its completeness, the beautiful thing she had imagined--the great terraces, the marble porches,
the fountains, lily-tanks, and cloisters. But you will see that, wherever it was possible--though
in humbler materials, and on a smaller scale--we have faithfully followed her design; and when
presently you go through this building, and when, hereafter, you find health and refreshment
and diversion here, I ask you to remember the beauty she dreamed of giving you, and to let
the thought of it make her memory beautiful among you and among your children...."

Justine had listened with deepening amazement. She was seated so close to her husband that
she had recognized the blue-print the moment he unrolled it. There was no mistaking its origin--it
was simply the plan of the gymnasium which Bessy had intended to build at Lynbrook, and which
she had been constrained to abandon owing to her husband's increased expenditure at the mills.
But how was it possible that Amherst knew nothing of the original purpose of the plans, and
by what mocking turn of events had a project devised in deliberate defiance of his wishes,
and intended to declare his wife's open contempt for them, been transformed into a Utopian
vision for the betterment of the Westmore operatives?

A wave of anger swept over Justine at this last derisive stroke of fate. It was grotesque and
pitiable that a man like Amherst should create out of his regrets a being who had never existed,
and then ascribe to her feelings and actions of which the real woman had again and again proved
herself incapable! 

"I am afraid we are going to have frost again." Then Reginald Morton was sure that the marriage
would never take place.

"The Trefoils are a very distinguished family," continued the rector.

"I remember the present Duke's father when he was in the cabinet, and knew this man almost
intimately when we were at Christchurch together. I don't think this
Duke ever took a prominent part in politics."

"I don't know that
he ever did," said Morton.

"Dear, dear, how tipsy he was once driving
back to Oxford with me in a gig. But no sane judgment could ask her
to sit quiet under this last hallucination. What! This unreal woman, this phantom that Amherst's
uneasy imagination had evoked, was to come between himself and her, to supplant her first as
his wife, and then as his fellow-worker? Why should she not cry out the truth to him, defend
herself against the dead who came back to rob her of such wedded peace as was hers? She had
only to tell the true story of the plans to lay poor Bessy's ghost forever!

The confused throbbing impulses within her were stifled under a long burst of applause--then
she saw Westy Gaines at her side again, and understood that he had come to lead Cicely to the
platform. For a moment she clung jealously to the child's hand, hardly aware of what she did,
feeling only that she was being thrust farther and farther into the background of the life
she had helped to call out of chaos. Then a contrary impulse moved her. She gently freed Cicely's
hand, and a moment later, as she sat with bent head and throbbing breast, she heard the child's
treble piping out above her:

"In my mother's name, I give this house to Westmore."

Applause again--and then Justine found herself enveloped in a general murmur of compliment
and congratulation. Mr. Amherst had spoken admirably--a "beautiful tribute--" ah, he had done
poor Bessy justice! And to think that till now Hanaford had never fully known how she had the
welfare of the mills at heart--how it was really only her work that he was carrying on there!
Well, he had made that perfectly clear--and no doubt Cicely was being taught to follow in her
mother's footsteps: everyone had noticed how her step-father was associating her with the work
at the mills. And his little speech would, as it were, consecrate the child's relation to that
work, make it appear to her as the continuance of a beautiful, a sacred tradition....

       *       *       *       *       *

And now it was over. The building had been inspected, the operatives had dispersed, the Hanaford
company had rolled off down the avenue, Cicely, among them, driving away tired and happy in
Mrs. Dressel's victoria, and Amherst and his wife were alone.

Amherst, after bidding good-bye to his last guests, had gone back to the empty concert-room
to fetch the blue-print lying on the platform. He came back with it, between the uneven rows
of empty chairs, and joined Justine, who stood waiting in the hall. His face was slightly flushed,
and his eyes had the light which in happy moments burned through their veil of thought.

He laid his hand on his wife's arm, and drawing her toward a table spread out the blueprint
before her.

"You haven't seen this, have you?" he said.

She looked down at the plan without answering, reading in the left-hand corner the architect's
conventional inscription: "Swimming-tank and gymnasium designed for Mrs. John Amherst."

Amherst looked up, perhaps struck by her silence.

"But perhaps you have seen it--at Lynbrook? It must have been done while you were there."

The quickened throb of her blood rushed to her brain like a signal. "Speak--speak now!" the
signal commanded.

Justine continued to look fixedly at the plan. "Yes, I have seen it," she said at length.

"At Lynbrook?"

"At Lynbrook."

"She showed it to you, I suppose--while I was away?"

Justine hesitated again. "Yes, while you were away."

"And did she tell you anything about it, go into details about her wishes, her intentions?"

Now was the moment--now! As her lips parted she looked up at her husband. The illumination
still lingered on his face--and it was the face she loved. He was waiting eagerly for her next
word.

"No, I heard no details. I merely saw the plan lying there."

She saw his look of disappointment. "She never told you about it?"

"No--she never told me."

It was best so, after all. She understood that now. It was now at last that she was paying
her full price.

Amherst rolled up the plan with a sigh and pushed it into the drawer of the table. It struck
her that he too had the look of one who has laid a ghost. He turned to her and drew her hand
through his arm.

"You're tired, dear. You ought to have driven back with the others," he said.

"No, I would rather stay with you."

"You want to drain this good day to the dregs, as I do?"

"Yes," she murmured, drawing her hand away.

"It is a good day, isn't it?" he continued, looking about him at the white-panelled walls,
the vista of large bright rooms seen through the folding doors. "I feel as if we had reached
a height, somehow--a height where one might pause and draw breath for the next climb. Don't
you feel that too, Justine?"

"Yes--I feel it."

"Do you remember once, long ago--one day when you and I and Cicely went on a picnic to hunt
orchids--how we got talking of the one best moment in life--the moment when one wanted most
to stop the clock?"

The colour rose in her face while he spoke. It was a long time since he had referred to the
early days of their friendship--the days before....

"Yes, I remember," she said.

"And do you remember how we said that it was with most of us as it was with Faust? That the
moment one wanted to hold fast to was not, in most lives, the moment of keenest personal happiness,
but the other kind--the kind that would have seemed grey and colourless at first: the moment
when the meaning of life began to come out from the mists--when one could look out at last
over the marsh one had drained?"

A tremor ran through Justine. "It was you who said that," she said, half-smiling.

"But didn't you feel it with me? Don't you now?"

"Yes--I do now," she murmured.

He came close to her, and taking her hands in his, kissed them one after the other.

"Dear," he said, "let us go out and look at the marsh we have drained."

He turned and led her through the open doorway to the terrace above the river. The sun was
setting behind the wooded slopes of Hopewood, and the trees about the house stretched long
blue shadows across the lawn. Beyond them rose the smoke of Westmore.

+--------------------------------------------------------------+ |                        
| |                    BOOKS BY EDITH WHARTON                    | |                      
| |             PUBLISHED BY CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS             | |                      
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |                        [12 mo. $1.50]                        | |                      
| |                      The House of Mirth                      | |                      
| |               Illustrations by A. B. WENZELL               | |                        
| |   "In my judgment 'The House of Mirth' is a story of such    | |  vitality, of such artistic
and moral insight, that it will  | | stand by itself in American fiction as a study of a certain
| |  kind of society. The title is a stroke of genius in irony,  | |    and gives the key to
a novel of absorbing interest, as    | |  relentless as life itself in its judgment, but deeply
and   | |    beautifully humanized at the end."--HAMILTON W. MABIE.    | |                
| | "Mrs. Wharton has done many good things. She has never done  | |         anything better
than this."--The Academy.          | |                                                    
| |  "She is the first to make a really powerful and brilliant   | | book out of the material
offered by American fashion to the  | | novelist.... A sterling piece of craftsmanship, a tale
which | |  interests the reader at the start and never lets him rest   | |        till the
end is reached."--New York Tribune.        | |                                            
| |    "So accurate an account of the thoughts and deeds of a    | | single human being has,
we are certain, never hitherto been  | |               written."--Boston Transcript.      
| |                                                              | |    "It is a great American
novel, intensely interesting,     | |     marvelous in its literary finish and powerful in
its     | |      delineation of Lily Bart."--Philadelphia Press.       | |                
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |                        [12 mo. $1.00]                        | |                      
| |                      Madame de Treymes                       | |                      
| |           Illustrated in color by A. B. WENZELL            | |                        
| | "We know of no book in which the virtues of the short story  | | are united with the virtues
of the novel in a higher degree  | |           than in this instance."--New York Sun.     
| |                                                              | +--------------------------------------------------------------+

+--------------------------------------------------------------+ |                        
| |                    BOOKS BY EDITH WHARTON                    | |                      
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |                        SIXTH EDITION                         | |                      
| |                       [12mo, $1.50]                        | |                        
| |                   The Greater Inclination                    | |                      
| |                           CONTENTS                           | |                      
| |                     The Muse's Tragedy                     | |                        
A Journey                          | |                        The Pelican                 
| |                       Souls Belated                        | |                        
A Coward                          | |                  The Twilight of the Gods           
| |                    A Cup of Cold Water                     | |                        The
Portrait                        | |                                                       
| |       "Between these stories and those of the ordinary       | | entertaining sort there
is a great gulf fixed."--The Dial. | |                                                    
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |                       [12mo, $1.50]                        | |                        
| |                      Crucial Instances                       | |                      
| |                           CONTENTS                           | |                      
| |                   The Duchess at Prayer                    | |                   The Angel
at the Grave                   | |                        The Recovery                    
| |                     "Copy": A Dialogue                     | |                       The
Rembrandt                        | |                     The Moving Finger                
| |                      The Confessional                      | |                        
| | "Tragedy and comedy, pathos and humor, are mingled in these  | |           pages of brilliant
writing and splendid            | |             imagination."--Philadelphia Press. Excuse me,
Mr. Morton, but I have to be on my p's and q's I see. This is a case for trespass and damage
against Lord Rufford in which we ask for 40s. an acre. Of course there is expenses. There's
my own time. I ain't to be kept here talking to you two gentlemen for nothing, I suppose.
Well; this gentleman comes to me and pays me 15 pounds to go on. I couldn't have gone on without
something. The gentleman saw that plain enough. And he told me he'd see me through the rest
of it."
 It stands, indeed, almost
without a  | | rival in the modern literary world, and there can be little  | | doubt that
it places Mrs. Wharton at once side by side with  | |     the greatest novelists of the day."--Boston
Evening     | |                         Transcript.                         | |           
| +--------------------------------------------------------------+

+--------------------------------------------------------------+ |                        
| |                    BOOKS BY EDITH WHARTON                    | |                      
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |                       [12mo, $1.25]                        | |                        
| |                          Sanctuary                           | |                      
| |              ILLUSTRATIONS BY W. APPLETON CLARK              | |                      
| | "This is a striking little book--striking in its simplicity  | |     and penetration, its
passion and restraint."--London     | |                           Times.                  
| |                                                              | |              *       *
*       *       *               | |                                                       
| |                       [12mo, $1.25]                        | |                        
| |                        The Touchstone                        | |                      
| |     "Its characters are real, their motives and actions      | |   thoroughly human. And
the author's art is sufficient to    | | bring out the strength of every situation."--The Argonaut.
| |                                                              | |              *       *
*       *       *               | |                                                       
| |                       [12mo, $1.50]                        | |                        
| |                      The Descent of Man                      | |                      
| |                           CONTENTS                           | |                      
| |                     The Descent of Man                     | |                    The Mission
of Jane                     | |                       The Other Two                       
| |                       The Quicksand                        | |                       The
Dilettante                       | |                       The Reckoning                  
| |                         Expiation                          | |                   The Lady's
Maid's Bell                   | |              A Venetian Night's Entertainment           
| |                                                              | |  "It is, of course, the
extraordinary directness with which  | | Mrs. Wharton's probe goes to the spot under inspection,
the  | | deftness with which she is able to bring to the light of day | | what we had hidden
even from ourselves, that account for the | | admiration with which we regard her short stories."--London
| |                          Academy.                          | |                        
| +--------------------------------------------------------------+

+--------------------------------------------------------------+ |                        
| |                    BOOKS BY EDITH WHARTON                    | |                      
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |             [8vo, $2.50 net. Postage 17 cents]             | |                        
| |                     Italian Backgrounds                      | |                      
| |                   ILLUSTRATED BY PEIXOTTO                    | |                      
| |                           CONTENTS                           | |                      
| |                   An Alpine Posting Inn                    | |                  A Midsummer
Week's Dream                  | |               The Sanctuaries of the Pennine            
| |                            Alps                            | |                    What
the Hermits Saw                    | |                      A Tuscan Shrine               
| |                     Sub Umbra Liliorum                     | |                       March
in Italy                       | |                     Picturesque Milan                  
| |                    Italian Backgrounds                     | |                        
| |  "Belongs in that small class of books of observation which  | |   are also books of artistic
and spiritual interpretation;   | | which not only describe places and monuments, but convey
an  | | impression of peoples, a sense of society, with the elusive  | |   atmosphere in which
everything of historical or artistic   | |  value is seen by those who have the gift of sight."--The
| |                          Outlook.                           | |                       
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |                     [12mo, $1.25 net]                      | |                        
| |                      The Joy of Living                       | |                      
| |                    (Es lebe das Leben)                     | |                        
| |  A play in five acts, by HERMANN SUDERMANN. Translated from  | |                 the German
by EDITH WHARTON.                 | |                                                     
| |              *       *       *       *       *               | |                      
| |                   [Large 8vo, $2.50 net]                   | |                        
| |                   The Decoration of Houses                   | |                      
| | With 56 full-page illustrations, by EDITH WHARTON and OGDEN  | |                      
CODMAN, JR.                          | |                                                  
| +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Most inconsistencies in hyphenation and spelling have been left as in the original. Missing
or wrong punctuation has been added or corrected, where it is obvious (missing punctuation
is often a result of the scanning/OCR process). In one case, a missing letter has also been
added, and the following misspellings have been corrected: involuntairly to involuntarily,
sensastions to sensations, Wetsmore to Westmore, Cilfton to Clifton, It to If